

BIP 16 (or 17) will not meet their initial "go/no-go" deadlines. You can see
the state of support here: http://blockchain.info/P2SH  
  
That's OK, that's why the deadlines were structured the way they are; in the
past, Satoshi made changes like this by simply changing the code and then
expecting everybody to upgrade. This is the first time we've used a more open,
community-driven process.  
  
So, since we'll miss the deadline, the question is: what next? To focus
discussion, here are two straw-man proposals that y'all can agree or disagree
with; I'll go along with whatever consensus arises over the next couple of
days:  
  

Quote

Support for BIP 16/17 will be evaluated weekly, beginning on February 1
(support measured as described in the BIP). Results shall be announced here in
this thread, and when support exceeds 55% the switchover date shall be set two
weeks from then (with announcements made here, to the bitcoin-development
mailing list, and to the Mining and Mining Pool forums). If support drops to
less than 20%, then the proposal shall be withdrawn.

  

Quote

To give more time for testing and deployment, there will be a new go/no-go
deadline for evaluating BIP 16/17 support. The new deadline for BIP 16 shall
be March 1, 2012. If 55+% support the new feature (as described in the BIP),
then March 15 shall be the switchover date.

  

* * *

On the subject of testing... I've created a wiki page to record QA (quality
assurance) testing that has been done on BIP 16. If you can help test, or have
been testing/deploying, then please add to this page:
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/BIP_0016_QA  
  
As always, (on-topic) discussion, feedback, etc. is very welcome. If we can,
I'd like to move past the "we dont' need to do ANYTHING" arguments, there is
clearly rough consensus (with notable exceptions) that a short-bitcoin-address
solution is needed.  

