

I've accepted an invitation to do a question and answer session at the Council
on Foreign Relations (CFR) in Washington, DC on Thursday, February 6, 2014.  
  
I've been told anything related to the Council on Foreign Relations tickle's
peoples Grand Conspiracy buttons, so I thought it would be best to be open
about exactly what will happen. I hope it doesn't spark as long a thread as my
visit to the CIA, but Bitcoin is a lot bigger than when I visited the CIA...  
  
Anyway, here's the invitation I received:  
  

Quote

On behalf of the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), I write to invite you to
speak to our Washington-based members as part of our Voices of the Next
Generation series. This program seeks to bring together our members with
fresh, young voices in the nationÂ’s foreign policy discourse. Given your work
with BitCoin, you would be an important addition to the series. In the past,
the Voices of the Next Generation series has featured Esther Duflo, Abdul
Latif Jameel professor of poverty alleviation and development economics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Ayman Mohyeldin, Middle East
correspondent, Al-Jazeera English, and Jennifer Pahlka, founder and executive
director, Code for America.  
  
CFR is a nonpartisan national membership organization and think tank, as well
as the publisher of Foreign Affairs. Among our members are many past and
present U.S. presidents, secretaries of state, defense, and treasury, as well
as other senior U.S. government officials, renowned scholars, and major
leaders of American business, media, and nongovernmental groups.

  
The format of the event will be a 90-minute question&answer session, moderated
by somebody yet-to-be-determined. It will be "on the record," meaning press
could be invited to attend and recordings and/or transcripts may be posted on
CFR's website.  
  
The audience will be CFR members and invited guests (and maybe press); it is
not open to the public. I am not getting paid by the CFR.  
  

