I'm mostly libertarian, although I'm sure the more pure libertarians here
would call me a fuzzy-headed socialist.  
  
Anyway, for seatbelts:  
  
Be careful comparing rich, Western countries to poorer countries. As we get
richer we value personal safety more, so we demand things like seat belts and
air bags in our cars.  
  
I believe that our politicians see that demand, then jump on the bandwagon and
pass laws that basically everybody thinks are a Good Idea, and then take
credit for making us safer.  
  
I'm not 100% certain that is true for seatbelts; I haven't actually looked at
the graph of traffic fatalities over time, to see if there is a bend in the
curve when seatbelt legislation is passed.  
  
For smoking: we shouldn't be allowed to do things that hurt, or have a
"reasonable" chance to hurt, other people. Personally, I waffle back and forth
over whether second-hand smoke imposes an unreasonable chance of harm on
others.  
  
I've looked at the evidence, and it seems that only people exposed to
repeated, long-term secondhand smoke have an increased risk of death. Like
spouses or children of smokers. And the smoking bans NEVER apply to private
residences. So again, I think politicians may just be jumping on the bandwagon
and passing feel-good laws that do no good (although in the last couple of
days I read that it looks like grotesque images on cigarette packs ARE
measurably effective at reducing smoking).  
  
For vaccinations: "herd immunity" from vaccinations is a true "public good,"
in the strict economic definition of "public good." I think it is fine and
dandy for the government to provide true public goods, either directly or
(usually better) by supporting/subsidizing private industry. Follow this link
for a reasonable, very-smart, mostly-libertarian perspective on public goods.  

