

Quote from: piuk on January 12, 2012, 01:29:13 AM

How would script hashes be represented in a wallet service? Should the script
hash be masqueraded as a bitcoin address or should they be differentiated?
OP_CHECKMULTISIG seems like it would be easier to represent in a client, you
can label it "Payment of x received, requires approval of bitcoin address
1223". I'm worried it could be very confusing for end users, people have a
hard time understanding bitcoin addresses as is already.  

  
I don't think they make the two-person-escrow case you describe any simpler;
use a plain CHECKMULTISIG for that case.  
  
I think they might make third-party escrow easier; the escrow agent would get
public keys from all the participants and then give the buyer a short script
hash to send the funds into escrow, instead of giving them three separate
public keys. If all the key gathering negotiation happens automatically (as it
should) then it doesn't really matter, but I suspect that it will take a while
to get a secure, convenient, well-supported multiparty transaction negotiation
protocol defined and implemented. So I bet pay-to-script-hashes for escrow
transactions will get copied and pasted (or put into emailed or SMS-ed URLs)
for at least a year or two.  
  
But the use case I REALLY care about is the secure, multiple-signatures-
required-to-spend wallet. Script hashes are the same length as existing
bitcoin addresses, so it should be much easier for services that can already
send to bitcoin addresses to be modified to send to multisignature script
hashes (if they use bitcoind to validate addresses then they will just need to
update bitcoind; otherwise it is a trivial change to their bitcoin-address-
validation routine to recognize the new pay-to-script-hash format).  

