

I've started and then stopped writing about Zerocoin three or four times now;
my thoughts about it are still muddled.  
  
It adds a whole lot of complexity to transaction creation/verification to
solve one problem: how to mix coins/transactions with zero trust in the mixing
process. That's technically nifty, but I wonder if it is the best engineering
solution.  
  
I wonder if just using a couple of semi-trusted mixers would be a lot
faster/smaller/simpler.  
  
And then I start thinking about "tainted coins" in general. If we imagine a
world with either mandatory or voluntary "taint tracking" (I have no idea
whether or not that will ever happen), then it seems to me any mixing scheme
that isn't "always on" is likely to fail in practice-- all coins coming out of
the mix will be considered tainted.  
  
Why? I assume that most users (if you are reading this are **NOT** "most
users") don't care much about privacy/anonymity. So I would assume most people
would choose the lowest cost, fastest, most convenient method for their
transactions. Anybody using a mixer will be either a weirdo, principled
privacy nut (like us) or a criminal. I don't see other "privacy first"
projects taking over the world, but do see lots of big, successful "quick and
easy and free" projects.  
  
Then my thoughts get muddled, because "it is hopeless, just give up" is not an
answer I'm willing to accept. But it feels to me like finding an essentially
zero-cost way to increase transaction privacy that everybody uses by default
is the best answer. Making your network connection more private is the other
piece of the puzzle, though, and all of the solutions for that (either route
through a couple of semi-trusted proxies or use Tor or i2p) add significant
convenience/speed/financial costs.  

