

I sent ShadowOfHarbringer's some of my thoughts on this in this private
message:  

Quote

Take a look at Table 2 in Meni's paper: "The maximal safe transaction value,
in BTC, as a function of the attacker's hashrate  
q and the number of confirmations n."  
  
Lets go with a 33% hashpower attacker, at 6 confirmations you can assume any
transaction up to about 300 bitcoins is safe.  
  
(disclaimer: I haven't taken the time to digest Meni's analysis, I'm going to
assume his numbers are correct).  
  
If you're worried about that, then don't make multi-thousand-dollar bitcoin
transactions with people you think might try to double-spend and rip you off
OR wait for more confirmations.  
  
Also: don't forget that "33% hashpower" means you have half as many
(asics/fpgas) as the rest of the network combined:  
  
Before attack: lets say network has 100 Thash  
You add 50 Thash, so during attack you have 50 of 150 Thash (== 33%)  

  
I don't worry much right now about economically irrational, "I'm going to
spend millions of dollars to disrupt the bitcoin network" attacks because I
don't think anybody is going to spend millions of dollars to disrupt our tiny
payment network.  
  
I have no idea what bitcoin payments will look like in 5-10 years; I expect
all sorts of trust mechanisms and relationships to develop that are
independent of the bitcoin network, and I suspect some of those will make 51%
attacks irrelevant.  
  
And I have no idea what the mining landscape will look like in 5-10 years; if
thousands of companies around the world are installing bitcoin mining hardware
for free in every house built in cold climates (generate bitcoins and get a
discount on your heating bill) then it may be completely inconceivable for
even a government to amass enough hashing power to mount a 51% attack.  
  
So while I encourage y'all to keep thinking about it as an interesting
theoretical problem, it is only slightly higher on my personal priority list
than worrying about quantum computers breaking ECDSA.  

