The popular perception is that our do-nothing Congress is going to drive our
country into a financial ditch.  
  
Tyler Cowen (one of my favorite economists, even though he's a Bitcoin
skeptic) points out that's not actually true.  
  
If Congress does nothing, then a bunch of things will happen which should
balance the budget in ten or so years:  
  
The Bush tax cuts will expire. Income tax rates go up for everybody (rich,
poor and middle class) and the Federal Government will get a lot more revenue.
If you're a Democrat who thought the Bush tax cuts were a really bad idea in
the first place then that shouldn't bother you.  
  
The SuperCommittee SuperFailure budget cuts will happen. Military and Domestic
spending will be cut. I'd be pretty happy with that, I think we're spending
way too much money on our military and don't think we get our money's worth
from most Federal government spending.  
  
Medicare spending will be cut, because there will be no "doc fix" to override
a law that was passed several years ago that was supposed to limit doctor
reimbursement of Medicare expenses. If that happens (I don't think it will),
then it'll suddenly become very difficult to find a doctor willing to accept
people on Medicare. It would, however, save a ton of money. It would also be a
fascinating natural experiment in health-care economics-- given that there's a
surprisingly weak correlation between health care spending and longevity or
other measures of health maybe we'd all be better off if we collectively spent
less money on doctors.  
  
From my perspective, do-nothing looks like a pretty good second-best solution.
I'd rather we cut military spending more, kept the tax cuts for people making
under $50,000 per year, and implemented Megan McArdle's plan for national
catastrophic health insurance. But Congress has shown that it is really good
at doing nothing, and I don't expect that to change.

