

Quote from: jav on February 16, 2011, 09:52:58 PM

I guess the block rate has been discussed before frequently and there are many
good arguments for the different sides. What this really makes me wonder: Is
there even a chance of this ever changing? How would it change? Someone with
access to the official repository committing it and releasing it? and would
that result in an immediate fork from people who think it's a stupid idea? I
wonder if Bitcoin needs some sort of democratic organ to make a decision like
that.  

  
First, "potentially forking" changes like that would be structured as:  
  
if (block number < SOME_BLOCK_NUMBER_IN_THE_FUTURE)  
...old rules  
else  
...new rules  
  
Assuming a super-majority of people agree with the change and upgrade before
we get to SOME_BLOCK_NUMBER_IN_THE_FUTURE, the switch will happen smoothly.  
  
Is there a chance of changing? Sure, but I think anybody who wants to make
such a fundamental change would need to do a LOT of testing-- maybe spin up or
recruit a few hundred machines all over the world on a test network, have them
mine and simulate transactions to each other (ideally with similar volume to
the real network) while going through the transition and making sure there
weren't any unintended consequences. And convince a super-majority of people
that the benefit of their potentially forking change outweighs the risk of
disrupting the network if there's some consequence they didn't think of or
that their test network didn't simulate properly.  
  
Practically, would dropping the block time from 10 minutes to 1 minute be
worth the risk? I doubt it. 1-10 minutes (1 would be the average, get unlucky
and it could take 10) is still too long to wait for small-value in-person
transactions.  
  
RE: democratic organ: bitcoin is a kind of a democracy. Whatever code the
majority of miners/nodes is running makes the rules.  

