Tomorrow night Amherst Town Meeting takes up Article 17, which rezones a
couple of "Village Centers" to encourage more mixed-use, walkable,
environmentally-friendly development.  
  
The Sustainable Amherst website has a great summary of the reasons it is a
good idea.  
  
There are a couple of different things going on in the Article-- first is the
proposal to change the zoning. That will bring out the NIMBYs who are afraid
of change (which, as I've said before, is completely rational). I hope they
can overcome their fear and think about all the nice things that might get
built. I really enjoy being able to walk to coffee shops and restaurants and
Captain Candy and the Farmer's Market, and I would think people living in
North Amherst would enjoy more places to hang out and shop, too.  
  
The second thing going on in Article 17 I'm not so enthusiastic about-- "Form-
based zoning." The idea is to write zoning rules to encourage the creation of
neighborhoods that 'feel' a desired way.  
  
I'm not enthusiastic just because I would rather take a 'creative destruction'
approach-- I believe that if you make it easier to redevelop, then
neighborhoods will evolve over time towards whatever their residents most
desire. I worry that adding Even More Pages to our Zoning Bylaw will just make
redevelopment more difficult and expensive, and will give Nimby neighbors more
opportunities to nit-pick a project to death.  
  
But maybe I'm wrong about that. Maybe Form-Based Zoning is a really good idea
and will speed the process of redevelopment along, so you get fewer strip
malls along the way towards tomorrow's quaint, historic village centers that
everybody adores. I'm willing to give it a try, and plan on voting for Article
17 tomorrow night.

