

Quote from: piuk on November 27, 2011, 11:04:44 PM

I agree that there are better optimisations that can be implemented first but
I still think it might be worth discussing for the future. Can you see any
obvious flaws in the proposal Gavin?  

Ummm, yes.  
  
It seems to me miners will have an incentive to lie about the transaction
ledger, and put fake ledger hashes in their blocks. Either so their
transactions might be considered 'unspent' by unsuspecting nodes that trust
them, or so that other miners that don't have the full block chain create
invalid blocks (eliminate the competition!)  
  
And I don't see a proposal that everybody check the ledger and reject blocks
that contain invalid ledger hashes.  
  
I also don't see what the ledger hash accomplishes. If you're going to trust
some other node's version of unspent-transaction-reality, then you could just
ask "send me the ledger state before (or after) the block with THIS block
hash".  
  
But if you're going to trust one or more nodes anyway... then it seems to me
sending an ever-increasing-in-size ledger is a bad way to get scalable. If
size-of-full-blockchain becomes a problem before the mining pools and big
exchanges/merchants/transactions processors all have transaction processing
clusters with a terabyte of ram and petabyte hard drive array then I think
extending the protocol to make it easy to request all transactions involved in
a given Merkle branch will probably be the way to go.  
  
But before then I expect the bitcoin network will look very different from the
way it looks today, and I expect there will be several different solutions for
how to scale up. If (when!) Bitcoin gets that successful, there will be
serious money hiring the same smart people who figured out how to scale up
PayPal and Visa.

