

This is a conversation with Matt Corallo (Bitcoin Core contributor) that
started on twitter and migrated into email:

**Matt Corallo** @TheBlueMatt - Mar 19  
Bitcoin Core does not want to and does not make decisions on Bitcoin 's
consensus rules

**Gavin Andresen** @gavinandresen - Mar 23  
Might a small, well-tested patch that added a default-false option to disable
block-size checks be accepted by Core?

**Matt Corallo**  
if it a) took HF risks seriously and had protections for then and b) had
community consensus to do a HF, sure!

**Gavin Andresen**  
I 'll email you- if you really don't want to dictate consensus rules, give
your users a choice!

**Matt Corallo**  
cool. You may also want to check out some of the HF proposals at
https://bitcoinhardforkresearch.github.io

**From: Gavin**  
**To: Matt**  
**Subject: Expanding an idea from Twitter …**

> If Core really wants to avoid taking sides in the Great Scaling Debate, why
not let users simply opt-out of block size-related checks?

>

> The idea would be "IF there is a hardfork, you can run with the
-anyblocksize=true option to follow the most-work branch of the chain."

>

> On twitter you say "if it took HF risks seriously" : it is paternalistic for
you to decide risk/reward, and when you do you just make lots of people really
upset.

>

> … and "had community consensus to do a HF" : again, you are just making lots
of people really upset by taking sides in the debate- who are you to judge
community consensus?

>

> I think a neutral statement from Core like "IF there is a hard fork over the
block size, Core software is able to follow either branch" along with a
trivial patch/option that, again, simply skips the validation checks for max
base block size / max block sigops / max segwit block size if the option is
set - would be a really good way of extricating the Core project from the
insanity of the debate.

>

> (I haven't looked at the code, but maintaining a 1MB max transaction size
would mitigate any quadratic hashing attack-block concerns)

**From: Matt**

> I get the paternalistic view, I really do, but that is neither the intent,
nor based on reality of peoples' views. It is very much based on a
misunderstanding of what roles developers are willing to play in the
community. No one wants to be a decision maker, and that feature is a key
differentiator of Bitcoin when compared to alternative systems.

>

> As I've said many times, if a reasonable hard fork is proposed which doesnt
have massive risk and has real community backing, it will be released in some
supported version or branch of Core (if nothing else, supported by me). What
this doesn't mean is a hard fork with no opt-in replay protection or with a
webapp to select consensus rules or a commitment to 20GB blocks or a low-
hashpower-commitment activation criteria.

>

> This also doesnt mean that I wont, personally, argue against it, but if
there's real community backing, I'm happy to maintain the code. I'm not "one
to judge consensus", that is for each individual to judge, and if they think
it exists they can and should run the code for it, even if it doesn't come
from Core.

>

> Because any realistic hard fork is going to have more than just a simple
block size rule relaxation (activation criteria, replay protection, n**2
sighash protection, additional commitments to block data, etc, etc, see
Spoonnet for a reasonable example of likely fixes), such a change only serves
to mislead users into thinking they are running something other than an SPV
client (might as well just have an SPV mode..we'll likely do one of these
days..when someone gets around to it).

>

> I'm disappointed that you seem to have bought into the deliberate
misunderstanding of the view of most devs in the community that a few very
loud voices in the community have been touting for their own political gain.
If you believe something other than Bitcoin Core has consensus, you can and
should run it! This is both critical to Bitcoin's success and a deeply held
view by every serious developer I know. The view that developers are refusing
to allow a consensus change that has real community backing is more than a
little insulting, and only exists to create diviceness and attempt a
negotiation with a group that can't negotiate except as individuals who can,
individually, advocate to the community for changes.

**From: Gavin**

> So… that's a no?

>

> Would a command-line option to allow users to say 'I want to go along with
hashpower consensus when it comes to block size' be unacceptable for some
reason?

>

> No code related to a hard fork AT ALL, zero expression on what the max block
size should or shouldn't be…

>

> Also: would you be willing to make this conversation public?

**From: Matt**

> That is a "you know as well as I do that no one individual can or should
make decisions about forks". Have you seen
https://bitcoinhardforkresearch.github.io with recent proposed hard forks by
Core contributors? I helped a ton early and contributed some to Johnson's most
recent one, but then I assume you saw the bitcoin-dev discussion and coindesk
article about it. Sadly the community seems to have a much lower appetite for
hard fork proposals these days, or at least has no interest in any of those
proposals.

>

> If you want to follow hashpower, great! You're an SPV Client, and there are
many great SPV clients out there for people to run.

>

> As for making it public, oops…I already posted my response (with your name
and original email omitted, of course).

