  
So... if the membership agrees with your "bugs" then they'll get fixed. Like I
said, the vision is it will be a member-driven organization. And like I said,
I find it is much more effective to start with something imperfect and improve
it over time rather than try to get everything exactly right and make
everybody completely happy at the start.  
  
My personal opinion on the "bugs":  
  
Name: I like the name. It can be changed if the membership decides on
something better.  
  
Hosting company: could easily be changed; it likely will be. I highly doubt
Cloudflare is a government honeypot for anything besides catching DDoS botnet
operators.  
  
Identities/voting: Please see "Sybil Attack" for why we're requiring names,
mailing addresses and emails. If you've got a magical way of identifying
anonymous people please send me the source code, I could use it for the
Bitcoin Faucet.  
  
Privacy policy: fair point, there should be a privacy policy on the website.  
  
US based: if Patrick (Foundation's lawyer) was Finnish we would probably be
Finnish-based. That's the whole "perfect is the enemy of the good" thing (and
I really don't want to have a month-long discussion about which legal
jurisdiction is the least likely to declare Bitcoin Foundation illegal, which
would be best for getting donors tax deductions, and whatever other arguments
we could have).  
  
  
One of the things that I think will be fascinating to watch is how users and
miners organize themselves (or not) to elect people to the Board. I'm not
going to pretend that the current composition of the Board is perfect-- I have
no idea if some arrangement would be better. But it seems to me before making
a statement like "there should be more of X on the Board" we should either get
some experience under our collective belts to see how things work OR find an
example of a similar, successful organization that works.  
  

