I'm pleased to announce the launch of the Bitcoin Foundation:  
  
The Bitcoin Foundation is modeled on the Linux Foundation. I think Linux is a
great "role model" for Bitcoin; it is a very successful open source project
that really embraced the notion of "open," encouraging the use of the core
technology for a wide range of applications.  
  
I hope that the Bitcoin Foundation will help do the same for Bitcoin.  
  
Of course, "the Foundation" won't do anything at all-- people get things done.
I want the Bitcoin Foundation to be an open, member-driven organization, and
hope that you or your organization will not only become a member but will help
the Foundation accomplish its mission.  
  
Please visit the Foundation website for details, and please keep in mind that
nothing is set in stone; the structure of the Foundation can be changed by a
vote of its members, and exactly what the Foundation does will largely depend
on who is willing to step up do the work to make things happen.  
  
To any of you feel like you should have been invited to be part of the group
who defined the initial structure and purpose of the Foundation: I apologize.
But in my experience the larger the group, the longer it takes to get things
done, and it has been 11 months since I first posted about the possibility of
forming a Foundation.  
  

* * *

In what will doubtless be an ineffective attempt to fend off the trolls, here
are some answers to what I expect might be commonly asked questions:  
  
 **Q:** Is this the infamous September Announcement?  
  
Yes.  
  
 **Q:** How do we know you won't just take our bitcoins and run?  
  
We won't. The initial Foundation board members are all people with well
established reputations using their real names.  
  
 **Q:** How do we know you won't lose our bitcoins to hackers?  
  
We'll be using a cold wallet, with the private key securely backed up, for
most of the Foundation's funds; in the near future I expect we'll be using a
multisignature cold wallet, with keys controlled by multiple Board members to
keep the funds even more secure.  
  
 **Q:** Is this just a front for the CIA? What is the hidden agenda?  
  
No. And there is none.  
  
 **Q:** The Foundation is a corporation, and corporations (especially US
corporations) are evil.  
  
OK. So don't join-- go form your own non-corporate non-evil organization, or
just ignore the Foundation and do whatever you think is right.  
  
 **Q:** How, exactly, is the Foundation going to spend the money it gets?  
  
That depends on how many bitcoins it gets from memberships and donations. See
Peter's "Letter from the Executive Director" for the current list of
priorities, and see the Linux Foundation website for an idea of the types of
things I hope the Bitcoin Foundation will be doing, assuming it has the funds.  
  

* * *

  
Finally, thanks to Peter Vessenes, Patrick Murck, Mark Karpeles, Charlie
Shrem, Jon Matonis and Roger Ver who stepped up and did the work necessary to
get this started.

