Here is an example of how to implement a payment system based on bit gold and
bit gold markets: if one wants the payment system for the masses to be in the
form of scalable digital bank notes, issued by competing banks with securely
auditable reserves, note-issuing banks can also play the role of the dealers
as follows:  
  
(1) the bit gold market sets the different prices for the different periods,
as before  
  
(2) banks own solution bits which being in the public replicated title
registry are securely auditable  
  
(3) competing banks issue digital bank notes redeemable in solution bits whose
market values add up to the face value of the bank note (i.e. they create
bundles of standard value)  
  
So the auditing software in step (2) checks the market prices to compute the
desired total values of solution bits. The bank software in step (3) goes
through the title database to discover solution bits that add up to the face
value of the note, and the bank client's software also checks the market
prices of these bits to keep the bank honest.  
  
The note-issuing banks are a minimal intrusion of trusted third parties (TTPs)
because they are securely auditable and the underlying assets are bit gold
which depend on distributed Byzantine agreement and cryptography rather than
singular TTPs.  
  
Notice BTW that we still don't need expressly represented accounts or
balances. Any such is an optional add-on feature. The total value of what a
key owns is implicit in the public title database but must be computed using
the market prices of the owned solution bits.  
  
Those familiar with the free banking of yore will observe that the above is a
pretty good analog of the banks that issued bank notes redeemable in gold
reserves.

