fred, you're right, thanks for the correction and for the clear specification.
For the weekly changes I get .25, which is considered to be at the high end of
small positive correlations, vs. the .93 for the overall 8-year price
movement.  
  
Interestingly as the time periods grow longer the correlation tends to grow.
For 20 week deltas (that is the week t price - the week t-20 price, repeated
every week) the correlation is 0.34. For the 40 week deltas the correlation is
0.64. (This is admittedly on data that has been adjusted to reflect a secular
fundamental 0.9%/year inflation in the gold price of oil as described above,
but I doubt this makes a huge difference at 40 weeks).  
  
I tentatively conclude from this that non-monetary (probably fundamental)
factors tend to outweigh monetary factors for shorter term price movements,
but over longer periods (roughly 40 weeks or more) monetary factors tend to
outweigh other kinds.  
  
BTW your statement "Show me any two series that increase over time and I'll
show you a correlation greater than 0.9" is a bit exagerated. I've just done
some experiments with random walks based on the same function, x1 = x0 +
rand()/100 + rand()/120, that is more likely to increase than decrease at each
step (and I threw out sample sets that didn't end up increasing overall, which
usually had negative correlations). Here are the correlations coefficients I
got for the pairs of such series that both increased: .64, .81, .75, .91, .74.
.87, .81, .72, .76, .91, .83. So .93 is at the outer range rather than near
the mean of what one would expect from pairs of increasing random walks.
Besides which, one also has to explain why both gold and oil are both
increasing over the long term in the first place, and again the answer is
monetary.

