  
  
Reader Matt comments on the Malthusian isocline here,, observing that I placed
17th century Britain a bit "higher" (presumably meaning more advanced, i.e.
more "northeast") on the graph than 17th century China.  
  
My placement in this case of one absolutely more advanced than the other is
highly conjectural. It's worse than comparing apples to oranges. I had to put
them somewhere on the graph and I used my best judgment. Britain was semi-
pastoral (yet still stationary) while China had a much more productive climate
for grain agriculture (much wetter in the summer and drier in the winter than
Britain) and thus could support a far higher population density per hectare.
But whether the Chinese population density per hectare adjusted for these
natural advantages (presumably leaving technological and institutional
differences, what I call denstiy per natural global hectare), which is what
I'm trying to graph on my x-axis, was still much higher is far more
conjectural. If we draw the x-axis as just population density per hectare
(rather than "natural hectare", i.e. adjusted for natural advantages) the
Chinese point is far higher, not just somewhat higher as I drew it, and thus
China's isocline was clearly more advanced, but I argue due to natural
advantages rather than technology or institutions. In terms of technology and
institutions, it's worse than apples to oranges not only because of the
radical difference between their basic agricultural strategy (labor-intensive
grain-and-bean vs. semi-pastoral and heavy use of draft animals) but each had
a number of advanced agricultural techniques the other rarely or never used.  
  
See here and here for the background to these theories and the graph in
question, as well as a very interesting film of street scenes that allow us to
compare the Chinese and British street transportation in the early 20th
century (largely before the IC engine replaced horses and rickshaws).  
  
Note that in contrast to the above graph which is schematic and partially
conjectural, the following, showing the relentless advanced of the isocline in
England from the Late Middle Ages, is based on actual statistics of population
and real agricultural labor wage income based on a food-dominated commodity
basket:  
  
  
  
This differs from the "noisy until 1800" graph of Clark because I've graphed
80-year averages rather than decadal averages to smooth out the noise of pests
and short-term climate variations on the quality of harvests which dominated
the position of the isocline before the 19th century. The points are from the
data but the slope of the isoclines I drew threw them are still conjectural.  
  
Much less conjectural than the relative levels of European and Asian 17th
century isoclines and probably more important for the issue of how Britain
escaped from the Malthusian trap is that the British laborer and peasant per
capita nutrition (roughly corresponding to real income in an era where food
dominated the peasant and laborer budget) was much higher than the Chinese.
Britain had more and higher quality protein in the diet (partly from more
dairy, which has genetic causes, but mainly from more meat, the British having
a stationary yet semi-pastoral agriculture). China, having far fewer draft
animals per capita, used laborers for arduous and repetitive tasks the Brits
considered fit only for draft animals.  
  
Part of Britain's better marginal standard of living can be put to disease,
especially the Black Death, but by the 18th century I'd agree that Britain was
as healthy as China. What we see after the Black Death is that the Brits
greatly increased their meat-eating and use of draft animals, and, what is
more important and seemingly unprecedented, were largely able to keep up this
intensive use of livestock after their population recovered and even boomed
beyond pre-Plague levels, whereas in (AFAIK all) prior agricultural eras and
areas increasing human populations in recovery from plagues replaced draft
animal with human labor and moved the diet towards grains and away from meat:
sliding "souteast" down a static isocline. Also frequent periods of war and
excess taxation had often led to the loss of draft animals and their
replacement by human labor, in these cases with a regressing (moving
"southwest") isocline. In both cases the capital accumulated in draft animals
and meat livestock was destroyed. As Steve Sailer correctly points out, in
Great Britain there has not been a major famine since before the Black Death
while in China they were common until very recently. After the Black Death
British agriculture went through a very long period of capital accumulation,
in the form of soil conditioners (especially lime), commercial seeds and
breeding, engineered water meadows that replaced phosphates and other scarce
nutrients, drainage (important in the wet British winters), crops and
rotations that fixed more nitrogen (at first growing beans for fodder, then
replacing beans with the even better nitrogen fixer clover), and many other
improvements besides the tremendous accumulation of livestock. Indeed
"improvement" was the watchword of British agriculture as soon as works about
it started being published.  
  
So the Chinese peasant and laborer worked harder on a worse diet and lived
much closer to starvation, whereas in hard times British peasants could go
back to eating the foods that after the Black Death they considered animal
fodder (beans, oats, etc.) whereas the analogous soybean was a protein staple
of the Chinese peasant as much as it was animal fodder. Again this doesn't
tell us whether China's isocline adjusted for its natural advantages was more
or less advanced, it tells us that Britain was operating with a higher
marginal and mean per capita standard of living and lower population density
relative to its natural advantages than China, i.e. further "northwest" on its
isocline.  
  
Besides the Columbian Exchange, and even more important, there may have been
an even greater but far less heralded exchange going on between Europe and
East Asia in the centuries after Europe established regular oceanic contact
between the two. Not so much in species, but in techniques and institutions,
aided by cheap paper, the printing press, and the resulting expansion of
literacy. As this contact increases we see both the East Asian and Western
European isoclines advancing rapidly. But the British isocline was advancing
faster than Asia's (regardless of which was more advanced absolutely), and
probably more importantly in Britain and at least early on the Netherlands
were largely maintaining the higher peasant/laborer standard of living despite
population growth, whereas in East Asia until the 20th century the isocline
started at an already low per-capita income yet the advance was still directly
entirely rightward towards higher population growth rather than in catching up
to British marginal standards of living. So Britain kept its big lead in per-
capita standard of living and farm labor productivity, and thus presumably in
the proportion of surplus labor that could be put to work on non-agricultural
tasks. And since Britain did not need as large an army as a Continental power,
nor as high taxes to support it, more of this labor could go into industry.  
  
Another major factor in industrialization was urbanization, that is the
proportion of this surplus labor that could be relocated where other industry
or industrial resources were available rather than to where the food was
grown. Urbanization (and presumably the general proportion of non-agricultural
population) during the 17th-19th centuries was growing rapidly in both Western
Europe, especially Britain, and Tokugawa Japan but less so in China, a
phenomenon I have yet to see explained (draft animals can't explain the
Japanese case as they resembled China in being relatively bereft of them). As
far as agriculture and urbanization goes, contrary to myth Tokugawa Japan saw
great progress, almost as much as Britain during the same period, albeit much
less technological progress in industry than Britain. Urbanization depended
most on water transport, i.e. the ability to transport grain to remote regions
(the same thing that made ancient Rome a very large city, in her case grain
imports across the Mediterranean from Sicily and Egypt). Without good water
transport labor beyond that needed for agriculture had to stay in the rural
areas near where the grain was grown. Japan, Britain, and the Netherlands had
good water transport with many farmers near navigable water due to geography
and engineering to extend the navigability of rivers and especially in the
Netherlands to build canals which served a triple role of defense barrier,
water control for reclamation of formerly submerged areas, and transport.
Britain and the Netherlands also had an advantage in that their preferred and
available source of protein, beef, could be transported over long distances
over land on the hoof, whereas the pigs, fowl, and soybeans of the Chinese
required water transport. Urbanization and industrialization also required
transport for fuel (wood and coal: forests near navigable water were soon
denuded and forests far from navigable water were generally useless. The Brits
could use far more forest area per capita because their draft animals could
transport more timber and fuel farther. Both the Brits and Chinese had ample
and easy-to-mine coal but only in Britain were there mines within ox- or
horse-transport distances of navigable water combined with a plentiful supply
of these draft animals, which explains why Britain was possibly mining more
coal than the rest of the world combined by the 17th century. Horse gin
powered pumps also drained the British coal mines before the dawn of the
Savery and Newcomen steam engines).  
  
China had for many centuries also had good water transport due to the Grand
Canal and its tributaries, but perhaps because of its artificial and inland
nature it was far more bureaucratically controlled and subject to excess
taxation and other institutional problems than the coastal transport in Japan
and Britain. Japan, with its long and thin coastline, probably had the
greatest amount of farmland next to coastline controlled by peoples speaking a
single language and thus able to trade food with low transaction costs. But
Britain's advantage in draft animals more than made up for having a fatter
island, as their horses probably made four or more times as much farmland
accessible to the navigable water than the mostly human-powered Japanese
transport, and its horses also increased the efficiency of river navigations
and (eventually) canals. After the railroad, and even moreso the IC engine,
reached Japan it quickly caught up to and leapfrogged ahead of Britain
(something Clark's theory can't explain).

