During my blog absence, I've been studying, designing, and implementing a
style of programming I call _temporal programming_. It is useful for, among
other things, implementing smart contracts. Meanwhile, I encourage readers
interested in programming to check out Node.js. Temporal programming starts
with event-oriented programming and takes it further. Temporal programming
will give us control over _when_ our instructions get executed: the plodding
do this, then that, then the other, as if machine activities are only supposed
to happen in one big long sequence and merely output some big long tape, will
be relegated to secondary status. More to come.  
  
\--------  
  
Is Netflix management really stupid? To summarize Megan McCardle, no: under
copyright law, DVDs are covered by the first sale rule -- once you buy a DVD,
you can't make a copy, but you can sell, rent or give away the DVD itself.
Streaming, on the other hand, essentially involves making a copy, and you
can't do it legally without the copyright owner's permission. So to stream the
most demanded content, you usually need the permission of owners, and thus
have to pay what they demand.  
  
It thus makes complete sense that Netflix has to charge high prices for
streaming -- because for the kind of content they want to stream (i.e. the
copyrights that are so valuable that their owners bother to prevent the
content from being distributed on YouTube), content owners are demanding
revenues similar to what they are accustomed to via cable.  
  
I'd add that the first sale rule also explains why Netflix, contrary to its
name, originally succeeded in out-competing a gaggle of Internet video
streaming companies by the stone-age method of shipping DVDs by mail. The main
thing Netflix may have done wrong was, after succeeding in pivoting from
Internet streaming to mailing DVDs, going back to their original goal in a way
that set false expectations about prices (i.e. that streaming prices would be
closer to DVD rental prices than to cable TV). Probably what happened is that
Netflix CEO Reed Hastings thought he could use his mail-order rental business
as leverage to negotiate lower prices with copyright owners, but this strategy
did not succeed.  
  
It also makes sense that Netflix (and their streaming competitors) lack
licensed content due to copyright owners' long-standing aversion to Internet
streaming. All this was happening to Netflix's video-streaming competitors
long before Netflix's much more recent emphasis on that business. Netflix
apparently hasn't, after all, solved the institutional problem that their DVD-
shipping model worked around.  
  
\---------  
  
Bit gold and I make brief appearances in Wired's Bitcoin article.  
  
\---------  
  
Water remains fun. Digital fountains show how precisely drops can be located
and timed:  
  
  
  
  
  
This one is a bit different, drops fall with uniform regularity but are used
to display light:  
  

