So asks gwern in a spectacular display of hindsight.  
  
The short answer about why it took so long is that the bit gold/Bitcoin ideas
were nowhere remotely close to being as obvious gwern suggests. They required
a very substantial amount of unconventional thought, not just about the
security technologies gwern lists (and I'm afraid the list misses one of the
biggest ones, Byzantine-resilient peer-to-peer replication), but about how to
choose and put together these protocols and why. Bitcoin is not a list of
cryptographic features, it's a very complex system of interacting mathematics
and protocols in pursuit of what was a very unpopular goal.  
  
While the security technology is very far from trivial, the "why" was by far
the biggest stumbling block -- nearly everybody who heard the general idea
thought it was a very bad idea. Myself, Wei Dai, and Hal Finney were the only
people I know of who liked the idea (or in Dai's case his related idea) enough
to pursue it to any significant extent until Nakamoto (assuming Nakamoto is
not really Finney or Dai). Only Finney (RPOW) and Nakamoto were motivated
enough to actually implement such a scheme.  
  
The "why" requires coming to an accurate understanding of the nature of two
difficult and almost always misunderstood topics, namely trust and the nature
of money. The overlap between cryptographic experts and libertarians who might
sympathize with such a "gold bug" idea is already rather small, since most
cryptographic experts earn their living in academia and share its political
biases. Even among this uncommon intersection as stated very few people
thought it was a good idea. Even gold bugs didn't care for it because we
already have real gold rather than mere bits and we can pay online simply by
issuing digital certificates based on real gold stored in real vaults, a la
the formerly popular e-gold. On top of the plethora of these misguided
reactions and criticisms, there remain many open questions and arguable points
about these kinds of technologies and currencies, many of which can only be
settled by actually fielding them and seeing how they work in practice, both
in economic and security terms.  
  
Here are some more specific reasons why the ideas behind Bitcoin were very far
from obvious:  
  
(1) only a few people had read of the bit gold ideas, which although I came up
with them in 1998 (at the same time and on the same private mailing list where
Dai was coming up with b-money -- it's a long story) were mostly not described
in public until 2005, although various pieces of it I described earlier, for
example the crucial Byzantine-replicated chain-of-signed-transactions part of
it which I generalized into what I call secure property titles.  
  
(2) Hardly anybody actually understands money. Money just doesn't work like
that, I was told fervently and often. Gold couldn't work as money until it was
already shiny or useful for electronics or something else besides money, they
told me. (Do insurance services also have to start out useful for something
else, maybe as power plants?) This common argument coming ironically from
libertarians who misinterpreted Menger's account of the origin of money as
being the only way it could arise (rather than an account of how it could
arise) and, in the same way misapplying Mises' regression theorem. Even though
I had rebutted these arguments in my study of the origins of money, which I
humbly suggest should be should be required reading for anybody debating the
economics of Bitcoin.  
  
There's nothing like Nakamoto's incentive-to-market scheme to change minds
about these issues. :-) Thanks to RAMs full of coin with "scheduled
deflation", there are now no shortage of people willing to argue in its favor.  
  
(3) Nakamoto improved a significant security shortcoming that my design had,
namely by requiring a proof-of-work to be a node in the Byzantine-resilient
peer-to-peer system to lessen the threat of an untrustworthy party controlling
the majority of nodes and thus corrupting a number of important security
features. Yet another feature obvious in hindsight, quite non-obvious in
foresight.  
  
(4) Instead of my automated market to account for the fact that the difficulty
of puzzles can often radically change based on hardware improvements and
cryptographic breakthroughs (i.e. discovering algorithms that can solve
proofs-of-work faster), and the unpredictability of demand, Nakamoto designed
a Byzantine-agreed algorithm adjusting the difficulty of puzzles. I can't
decide whether this aspect of Bitcoin is more feature or more bug, but it does
make it simpler.

