I recently wrote about how the ability of Japan and Britain to defend their
farmlands from foreign invaders, via their island positions and strong navies,
were probably not unrelated to their having among the highest farm
productivities between medieval and early modern times, despite unfavorable
soils and climates.  
  
A similar phenomena occurred for commerce in commodities (including
agricultural commodities after being harvested). However, here the optimal
scales of defense are much smaller since stores of commodities, along with the
persons who produce, deal in, and consume those commodities, require far less
space than farmland. Thus during many eras cities were independently
defensible areas. In late medieval Europe cities became so independently
defensible and had such different laws (specialized for commerce in
commodities instead of agriculture) that they often became politically
independent. Indeed, four of the most successful medieval empires, Venice,
Genoa, the Lombard League, and the Hanseatic League, were either centered on
such cities or were an alliance of such cities.  
  
Several medieval areas especially benefitted from small defensible areas. See,
for example, this nice satellite image of Venice.  (There have been some small
changes since the Middle Ages -- some of what is now ocean was once swamp
land). From their small island base, Venice was able to withstand the various
Dark Age invasions and become a Mediterranean superpower. Low Country cities
such as Bruges, Ghent, and Amsterdam were surrounded and criss-crossed by
canals such as this one in Bruges.  
  
Canals and oceanside locations also extended the reach of shipment for
commodities. Adam Smith estimated that water transport was about out twenty
times cheaper by water than by the same distance on land.

