Per Hanson's donation: a huge uncertainty, i.e. point (1) above, with the
Brain Preservation Technology Prize is the supposed strong relationship
between "with such fidelity that the structure of every neuronal process and
every synaptic connection remains intact and traceable using todayâ€™s electron
microscopic (EM) imaging techniques" (a mistake right there, since these
techniques image static structure, they don't trace processes), and the goal
that one day subjects undergoing some such treatment will "live again." It's
quite possible that the presumably requisite consciousness and memories for
"liv[ing] again" require molecular or other kinds of structures different from
those being preserved here.  
  
Furthermore, preserving information about a molecular structure does _not_
automatically, or perhaps even probably in the case of sophisticated
assemblages of biomolecules, lead to the ability to recreate that structure in
sufficient detail. It's possible that the chemical routes for doing so may
prove infeasible (i.e. too expensive for any feasible technology).  
  
What's more, per point (2), we don't know whether such capabilities even if
they worked would lead to utopia or dystopia for the experimental subjects
preserving their brains in hopes of future reanimation. The superhuman brain
scientists of the future mainly might well look on me, even while "liv[ing]
again", the way today's scientists treat their static brain slices: as a
specimin to be studied. Nobody real knows whether these experimental subjects
will wake up in a high-tech paradise or as hopelessly inferior subjects in a
gruesome experiment they can't control.  
  
There are probably many other sources of uncertainty that I haven't considered
yet, and many they haven't considered yet either.  
  
On point (3) I give them credit since they are trying experiments to reduce
some of the uncertainties involved, even if much uncertainty would remain
after the prize for preserving certain structures has been won. And the
experiments don't seem very expensive. So, while not donating myself, I say
let them have at it.

