I've noticed that there are strong parallels between accounting and two
important areas of mathematics -- the elementary algebra and the calculus. I
suspect these reflect the origins of algebra in accounting and origins of some
of the basic concepts behind the calculus in accounting. Readily available
references to the history of accounting and mathematics may be too scant to
prove it, but I think the parallels are quite suggestive.  
  
A basic parallel between accounting and algebra is the balance metaphor. The
origin of this metaphor was almost surely the balance scale, an ancient
commercial tool for measuring the weight of precious metals and other
commodities. Standard weights would be added or removed from the scale until
balance with the commodity to be weighed was achieved.  
  
Starting with the "accounting equation," **assets = liabilities + equity,**
the strategy of accounting as with algebra is to achieve numerical balance by
filling in missing quantities. As far back as the Sumerians the need for
balance in accounting was widely understood, but it was expressed either in
purely verbal or purely ledger form rather than with an algebraic
notation.(Simarily, logic was expressed in standard language rather than with
its own abstract symbolic notation until Gottleib Frege in the 19th century).
Furthermore, examples of algebraic work left by the Sumerians, Babylonians,
and Indians, and indeed up to the time of Fibonacci and Pacioli, typically
involved accounting problems.  
  
Calculus largely has its origins in the study of change and how a dynamic view
of the world relates to a static view of the world. Newton called calculus the
study of "fluxions," or units of change. (This is a more descriptive label for
the field than "calculus" which simply means "calculating stone" and has been
used to refer to a wide variety of areas of mathematics and logic). Long
before Newton, the relationship between the static and the dynamic was
probably first conceptualized as the relationship between the balance sheet
and the income statement. The balance sheet, which can be summarized as  
  
 **assets = liabilities + equity**  
  
is the "integral" of the income statement which can be summarized as  
  
 **revenues = expenses + net income**  
 ****  
(in other words, the income statement is the "derivative" of the balance
sheet: the change in the balance sheet over a specific period of time).  
  
Earlier civilizations had only mapped large scales of time to a spatial
visualization in the form of a calendar. Diaries and accounting ledgers
ordered by time also crudely map time into space. The sundial mapped time into
space, but in a distorted manner. Medieval Europeans with the invention of the
mechanical clock and of musical notation including rhythm expanded and
systematized the mapping of time to a spatial visualization with consistent
units. William of Occam and other Scholastics visualized time as a spatial
dimension and other phenomena (including temperature, distance, and moral
qualities) as orthogonal dimensions to be graphed against time. Occam then
used methods of Archimedes to calculate absolute quantities from the area
under such curves, but we awaited Newton and Leibniz, building on the
analytical geometry of DesCartes, which systematically related algebraic
equations to spatial curves, to create a systematic calculus. Earlier in
India, the algebra and much of the differential calculus were also developed
within or alongside a rich business culture in which bookeeping using "Arabic"
numerals (also invented in Inda) was also widespread. I conclude that the
conceptual apparatus behind much traditional mathematics originated in
commercial accounting techniques.  
  
A big exception to this is geometry. Geometry developed primarily from the
need to define property rights in the largest form of wealth from the
neolithic until quite recently, namely farmland, but that is another blog post
for another day.

