I don't know about Koch. Maitland, while a university scholar, was a legal
historian who read many legal cases about liberties and franchises, and thus
can be expected to have some understanding of political property, albeit as
with many of these university-based legal historians an understanding confused
and obscured by the classical and Romanist ideologies of the universities.
Holdsworth, from my reading, had a somewhat better understanding of such
matters than Maitland.  
  
Competition is indeed often an important effect of political property.
Generally speaking, it is very productive kind of competition, similar to free
market competition, if agreed to before a dispute arises, as with the
merchants who chose to trade at a market court and didn't know whether they
would end up as plaintiffs or defendants at the market's court in the event of
a dispute. On the other hand there is a very destructive kind of competition
when the choice of forum is made by the plaintiff after a lawsuit has already
arisen, or after the parties already know who will be the plaintiff and who
the defendant. This is often too broadly called "forum shopping." In forum
shopping the plaintiffs shop for the court that will be most unjust and
oppressive to the defendants.  
  
Thus with positive, i.e. coercive, rights, competition can be quite good or
quite destructive depending on whether it happens before or after the parties
involved learn whether they are to be the enforcer or the enforcee. One cannot
straightforwardly apply free market economic principles, which assume
voluntary transactions, to political property which is coercive.

