Here I wrote about the U.S. Constitution as descending from charters of
political property rights, in particular political property granted to
corporations. I've also written about Semayne's case, in which Chief Justice
Coke discussed an inalienable political property right attaching to residences
under common law. Let me know if you have further questions.  
  
So one can think of the U.S. Constitution as granting political property to
one corporation (the U.S. federal government) -- positive grants of certain
enumerated powers to coerce other organizations and individuals -- and taking
away some political property from others (States, formerly corporate or
proprietary colonies) -- and granting some negative political property rights
to individuals that serve to limit this coercion in some areas. (Under common
law or natural law, English subjects arguably had these rights already, and
there was thus a serious debate about whether an express Bill of Rights that
purported to grant rights that were already held was necessary or proper --
but given the neglect of common law and natural rights since then, and the
move to legal positivism where if it's not codified it doesn't count, it's
fortunate that they were codified).  
  
I should point out, though, that by the time of the drafting and ratification
of the U.S. Constitution, most Americans and Englishmen just thought of these
as generic political powers and rights, increasingly distinct from economic
property rights, per the Roman law's model of purely economic property rights
that had been gaining popularity since the Renaissance. Still, if you want to
go behind the Constitution to understand the precedents that came before it
and gave rise to it (and thus inform the meaning of the words and the
methodology whereby one interprets them), one should understand political
powers and rights as the prior generations of English lawyers understood them,
as property.

