james: _Bit gold has the problem that it will suffer rapid predictable
inflation_  
  
This problem is easily solved, because the bit strings (puzzle
problem/solution pairs) are securely timestamped by their time of publication
More recent (and thereby cheaper to produce and thus in greater supply) bits
will be discounted by a market. To create fungible units one has to bundle
strings of different value into pools of a standard value (i.e. collect
strings into a pool so that the sum of the market values of the strings in the
pool add up to the standard value).  
  
It's a bit indirect, but comptuers can easily handle these logistics. Leaving
aside the gold metaphor for a minute, one can think of these bit strings as
digital rare postage stamps. Each stamp might trade for a different price, but
one can sort stamps into pools so that the prices of stamps in each pool add
up to the same total price. Then divide each pool into tranches to create your
standard currency denominations.  
  
One misleading aspect of the rare stamp metaphor is that unlike stamps, but
like gold, there is little or no ongoing change in subjective valuation
between bit strings to worry about, but instead it's purely based on how
scarce the supply of puzzles solved during a given time period was and is:
thus pooling will work much better for bit gold than it does for actual rare
postage stamps.  
  
There will be a problem defining futures contracts for yet-to-be produced bit
gold: how much it might cost to solve a given puzzle a year later, or even a
month, will be a very uncertain matter. But the pools that define currencies
will be based on spot prices for already produced bit gold, not on futures.

