This is the first in a series of articles about mining the sea floor for
minerals. This article is about the first and largest such activity, offshore
oil and gas, and especially the more recent activity in deep water oil. First,
however, there is currently a fasionable topic, the discussion of which will
help put deep water oil in perspective: namely the nonsense about "peak oil"
-- the theory that worldwide oil production has or will soon peak and that we
thus inevitably face a future of higher oil prices.  
  

 _Layout of the Total Girassol field, off the shore of Angola in 1,400 meters
of water, showing the FPSO ship, risers, flow lines, and subsea trees (well
caps and valves on the sea floor)._  

### Why peak oil is nonsense

There are any number of reasons why peak oil is nonsense, such as tar sands
and coal gasification. Perhaps the most overlooked, however, is that up until
now oil companies have focused on land and shallow seas, which are relatively
easy to explore. But there is no reason to expect that oil, which was largely
produced by oceans in the first place (especially by the precipitation of dead
plankton), is any more scarce underneath our eon's oceans as it is under our
lands. Oceans cover over two-thirds of our planet's surface, and most of that
is deep water (defined in this series as ocean floor 1,000 meters or more
below the surface). A very large fraction of the oil on our planet remains to
be discovered in deep water. Given a reasonable property rights regime
enforced by major developed world powers, this (along with the vast tar sands
in Canada) means not only copious future oil, but that this oil can mostly
come from politically stable areas.  
  

 _The FPSO, riser towers and flow lines in Total's Girassol field off of
Angola._

Some perspective, even some purely theoretical perspective, is in order. If we
look at the problem at the scale of the solar system, we find that
hydrocarbons are remarkably common -- Titan has clouds and lakes of ethane and
methane, for example, and there are trillions of tonnes of hydrocarbons, at
least, to be found on comets and in the atmospheres and moons of the gas giant
planets. What is far more scarce in the solar system is free oxygen. If there
will ever be a "peak" in the inputs to hydrocarbon combustion in the solar
system it will be in free oxygen -- which as a natural occurence is extremely
rare beyond Earth's atmosphere, and is rather expensive to make artificially.

_A deep sea "robot hand" on a ROV (Remotely Operated Vehicle) more often than
not ends in an attachment specific for the job. Here, a subsea hydraulic
grinder and a wire brush._

What's even more scarce, however, are habitable planets that keep a proper
balance between greenhouse gases and sunlight. Venus had a runaway greenhouse,
partly from being closer to the sun and partly because of increased carbon
dioxide in its atmosphere which acts like an inulating blanket, preventing
heat from radiating away quickly enough. The result is that Venus' surface
temperature is over 400 C (that's over 750 fahrenheit), hotter than the
surface of Mercury. On Mars most of its atmosphere escaped, due to its low
gravity, and its water, and eventually even much of its remaining carbon
dioxide, froze, again partly due the greater distance from the sun and partly
due the low level of greenhouse gases in its generally thin atmosphere.

_Hydraulic subsea bandsaw. Great for cutting pipes as shown here._

So far, the Earth has been "just right", but the currently rapidly rising
amount of carbon dioxide and methane in our atmosphere, largely from the
hydrocarbons industries, is moving our planet in the direction of Venus.
Nothing as extreme as Venus is in our foreseeable future, but neither will
becoming even a little bit more like Venus be very pleasant for most of us.
The real barrier to maintaining our hydrocarbon-powered economy is thus not
"peak oil", but emissions of carbon dioxide and methane with the resulting
global warming. That peak oil is nonsense makes global warming even more
important problem to solve, at least in the long term. We won't avoid it by
oil naturally becoming too expensive; instead we must realize that our
atmosphere is a scarce resource and make property out of it, as we did with
"acid rain."  
  
This series isn't mainly about oil or the atmosphere, however; it is about the
technology (and perhaps some of the politics and law) about extracting
minerals generally from the deep sea. Oil is the first deep sea mineral to be
extracted from the sea on a large scale. The rest of this article fill look at
some of the technology used to recover offshore oil, especially in deep water.
Future posts in this series will look at mining other minerals off the ocean
floor.

_Painting of the deepwater (1,350 meters) subsea trees at the Total Girassol
field. They're not really this close together._

### FPSOs

Once the wells have been dug, the main piece of surface equipment that remains
on the scene, especially in deep water fields where pipelines to the seashore
are not effective, is the Floating Production, Storage, and Offloading (FPSO)
platform. The FPSO is usually an oil tanker that has been retrofitted with
special equipment, which often injects water into wells, pumps the resulting
oil from the sea floor, performs some processing on the oil (such as removing
seawater and gases that have come out with the oil), stores it, and then
offloads it to oil tankers, which ship it to market for refining into gasoline
and other products. The FPSO substitutes far from shore and in deep water for
pipes going directly to shore (the preferred technique for shallows wells
close to a politically friendly shoreline).  
  
Many billions of dollars typically are invested in developing a single deep
water oil field, with hundreds of millions spent on the FPSO alone. According
to Wikipedia, the world's largest FPSO is operated by Exxon Mobil near Total's
deep water field off Angola: "The world's largest FPSO is the _Kizomba A_ ,
with a storage capacity of 2.2 million barrels. Built at a cost of over US$800
million by Hyundai Heavy Industries in Ulsan, Korea, it is operated by Esso
Exploration Angola (ExxonMobil). Located in 1200 meters (3,940 ft) of water at
Deepwater block 15,200 statute miles (320 km) offshore in the Atlantic Ocean
from Angola, West Africa, it weighs 81,000 tonnes and is 285 meters long, 63
meters wide, and 32 meters high ((935 ft by 207 ft by 105 ft)."  
  
  

### ROVs

Today's ROVs (Remotely Operated Vehicles) go far beyond the little treasure-
recovery sub you may have seen in "Titanic." There are ROVs for exploration,
rescue, and a wide variety of other undersea activities. Most interesting are
the wide variety of ROVs used for excavation -- for dredging channels, for
trenching, laying, and burying pipe, and for maintaining the growing variety
of undersea equipment. Due to ocean-crossing cables and deep sea oil fields,
it is now common for ROVs to conduct their work in thousands of meters of
water, far beyond the practical range of divers.  
  

_A grab excavator ROV._

It should be noted that in contrast to space vehciles, where teleprogramming
via general commands is the norm, and often involves long time delays between
the commands being sent and the results being known to the spacecraft's
operators, with undersea operations real-time interaction is the norm. Due to
operator fatigue and the costs of maintaining workers on offshore platforms,
research is being done on fully automating certain undersea tasks, but the
current state of the art remains a human closely in the loop. The costs of
maintaining workers on platforms is vastly lower than the cost of maintaining
an astronaut in space, so the problem of fully automating undersea operations
is correspondingly less important. Nevertheless, many important automation
problems, such as the simplification of operations, have had to be solved in
order to make it possible for ROVs to replace divers at all.  

_A ROV for digging trenches, used when laying undersea cable or pipe._

Another important consideration is that ROVs depend on their tethers to
deliver not only instructions but power. An untethered robot lacks power to
perform many required operations, especially excavation. At sea as long as the
tether is delivering power it might as well deliver real-time interactive
instructions and sensor data, i.e. teleoperation as well.  
  
Trenching and other high-power ROVs are usually referred to as "work class."
There are over 400 collectively worth more than $1.5 billion in operation
today and their numbers are increasingly rapidly.  

_Tankers are big, but storms can be bigger._

### Harsh Conditions

Besides deep water and the peril of storms anywhere at sea, many offshore
fields operate under other kinds of harsh conditions. The White Rose and Sea
Rose fields of Newfoundland start by excavating "glory holes" dug down into
the sea floor to protect the seafloor against icebergs which can project all
the way to the fairly shallow sea floor. Inside these holes the oil outflow
and fluid injection holes themselves are dug and capped with subsea trees
(valves). The drill platform, FPSO, and some of the other equipment has been
reinforced to protect against icebergs.  
  
In future installments, I'll look at diamond mining and the startups that plan
to mine the oceans for copper, gold, and other minerals.  
  

