George, it's based on the theory that the optimal level of taxpayer-provided
public goods is above zero, and probably well above zero. A fairly
straightforward example: your economic growth will be higher if taxpayers
successfully fund defenses against conquest by another power that would tax
you at a higher level. (This is economic growth in terms of GDP as well as
actual subjective value -- I realize these two can be quite different, but
this argument applies to both).  
  
In terms of a subject trying to minimize his taxes, it pays for him to support
the defense (or force his neighbors to support it through taxes) if the
conqueror would tax him more than the current government. This of course
reduces things down to monetary considerations -- in reality the language,law,
and race of the current government versus those of the conqueror, and a
variety of religious and ideological considerations also come into play.  
  
"government should be seeking to maximize not total revenue but rather the
amount of wealth it can spends as it pleases, with the amount spent on
anything actually useful being a regrettable but necessary cost of doing
business."  
  
By "should" here I hope you mean "can be expected to." :-) I do wonder how
much overlap there is between what "it pleases" to spend money on and actual
public goods. Mostly they seem to spend to increase their control over
peoples' lives and to signal their supposed altruism, which sometimes does but
often does not correspond to actual public goods.  
  
Traditionally kings and other kinds of governments also faced a kind of
Darwinian pressure -- if they spent to much as they pleased and not enough on
defense, they didn't survive long.

