Another interesting possibility, BTW, is that the experiment itself actually
_bred_ an arsenate-using bacteria, and the unmutated bacteria in the wild
doesn't actually use much arsenate -- it just tolerates some contamination of
phosphate-based molecules with arsenate while generally using the more
abundant and functional phosphate. Since Mono Lake is still more abundant in
phosphate than arsenate (just much less so than normal environments), this
would make sense and we'd have to discover a very rare (at least) environment
where arsenate is actually much more abundant than phosphate to see a bacteria
that actually evolved to be dominated by arsenate rather than phosphate in the
wild.  
  
One could also sequence the genomes of the wild and the post-experiment
strains and see if there have been relevant mutations to see whether the
experiment included breeding a merely arsenate-tolerant bug to be (presumably)
functionally dominaed by arsenate.  
  
Even if Wolfe-Simon bred the arsenate-dominated strain in the process of the
experiment, the fact that such an organism is even possible to breed is just
about as important as if it actually can act arsenate-only with the genetic
code it has in the wild. The main discovery if it stands is that arsenate-
dominated function is possible, and whether one has to breed it or whether it
occurs completely in nature is a secondary issue. Obviously if the experiment
can be repeated achieving this organism doesn't require major genetic
manipulation, just at most mutation(s) probable in lab-sized populations and
thus probable in nature if there actually exist any arsenate-dominated natural
environments.

