The late Chief Justice William Rehnquist entitled his book on the history of
civil rights during wartime "All The Laws But One." The title is from a quote
by Abraham Lincoln complaining about the judicial system's protection of the
rights of alleged conspirators even during the Civil War: "Are all the laws,
but one, to go unexecuted, and the government itself to go to pieces, lest
that one be violated?" The "one" law being the liberty the court was trying to
preserve. This is one of the most abused quotes in American legal thought, and
it has seldom been abused as often as it is being now.  
  
First of all, even from Lincoln the question was rhetorical and the rhetoric
was exaggerated. Even had the North lost the Civil War, some very desirable
laws would have taken a beating (e.g. laws that ended up being promulgated to
ban slavery in the South), but the execution of most other laws would have
gone ahead as before. Furthermore, most of the cases being adjudicated
typically occurred well away from enemy lines and in late stages of the war
when there was no serious danger of the South winning.  
  
Nevertheless, Abraham Lincoln faced a far more difficult problem with the
execution of the laws than governments fighting the "War on Terror" face
today. When Lincoln made this quote it was plausible; applying it to today's
situation is not. Despite the difficulties the Union faced, its judiciary
endeavored to preserve the rights of civilians against military encroachment.
One very good result of that, which should be closely heeded by Courts today,
is Ex Parte Milligan. Despite a Civil War far more damaging to the normal
execution of the laws than any imminent threat the United States has ever
faced since, the Court held for liberty in wartime against the encroachment of
authoritarian military justice.  
  
Civil liberties take their greatest hits during wartime. First Amendment
rights were violated in the United States after the French Revolution when the
States were threatened by further rebellion and being drawn into the ensuing
war between England and France. They were again trampled upon during World War
I. The Holocaust in Germany and Korematsu in the United States occurred during
World War II. Vigilance in protecting our liberties is at no time more
important than during a perceived or actual "war."  
  
Many argue that today we are again at war: the "War on Terror." If the Soviet
Union had attacked the United States on 9/11, we would have gone to war with
them, so the argument goes. Actually, the Soviet Union did attack the
passenger airplane of a close ally, South Korea, killing several hundred
people including many United States citizens and a United States Congressman.
There was no serious argument at the time that this was an act of war. An act
of war occurs not merely from an attack, but from an attack that seriously
damages our military and threatens our territory, for example the Japanese
attack on Pearl Harbor. That attack was no isolated attack for the sake of
killing people and making headlines, but a very serious and, at least
initially, very successful attempt to destroy American naval might and capture
large pieces of its territory (e.g. the Philippines) and territory of its
allies (French Indochina, Dutch Indonesia, etc.) Al Quaeda is full of some
very sick people and stirs up quit a bit of torrid television coverage, but it
is not a threat comparable to Imperial Japan.  
  
Unlike earlier wars fought between governments to a conclusion, a "War on
Terror" will last forever. It's like fighting a "War on Blitzkrieg" or a "War
On Drugs" or a "War on Murder." Terrorism is a particularly evil type of
violence that has plagued humankind since the dawn of history, and there is no
sign that the evils of terrorism will be eliminated any time soon.  
  
Professor Burt Neuborne of New York University School of Law compares the
authoritarian military justice system with our civilian justice system. Some
societies, such as China, have a justice system runs as if the society was in
a permanent state of war -- as indeed might characterize the antagonistic
relationship between Party members and the rest of society there. In the
United States the justice system is bifurcated, with the authoritarian
military justice system reserved for military personnel or enemies in war.  
  
Neuborne observes that the authoritarian system that typically takes over
governments during wartime makes three large errors in the pursuit of security
that impact liberty: it overstates risks, it generates many false positives
(i.e. persecutes people thought to be risky but actually innocent), and it is
overly harsh. The current abuse of Lincoln's quote is an extreme example of
overstating the risks. The Jews killed by Germany and the Japanese interned by
the United States are extreme examples of false positives, and, at least of
the former, of overly harsh reactions.  
  
We must thus confront the question: are we to compromise our constitutional
liberties and natural rights for the sake of a "war" of a very different kind
and degree faced in Ex Parte Milligan? Assuming we are indeed at war, with an
enemy that wears no uniform and may include American residents and American
citizens, who gets to decide who is an "enemy combatant,‚Äù to be herded into
the authoritarian military justice system, and who is just another alleged
criminal with full constitutional rights? Those among us who long for more
authority and destruction of liberty on the model of China, Nazi Germany, the
Soviet Union, or some aspects of the United States itself during World War II,
or who negligently ignore these nasty lessons of history, let their pining for
security overcome them and argue that we can trust the authoritarian military
justice system. In a free society it is the civilian courts, or at least
courts with procedural protections comparable to the civilian courts, that
ought to make that initial determination. In a free society it is the civilian
courts under the fully unfurled umbrella of a constitution which should
thereafter handle people who are not enemy combatants of a war power that
threatens the very execution of our laws, but are just particularly evil and
destructive criminals.

