Erin, economic assets often are not fixed. Here the music store has a cheap
way to threaten (and if necessary carry out the threat) to destroy one of the
doctor's major assets, namely the office location and its attractiveness as a
place to heal (there's enough energy even in one good guitar amp to destroy
that).  
  
Similarly, the railroad can use sparks to cheaply destroy an asset of the
farmer (his field). More generally, militaries can cheaply destroy the assets
of their enemies -- one of the major things militaries traditionally did, when
agriculture was a much bigger part of the economy, is destroy the enemies'
crops. And weapons make it cheap to destroy the ultimate asset, life. One
consequence is that one also needs weapons to protect against such
destruction.  
  
Also, even if transaction costs are zero and a deal is made every time, the
doctor has to give away most of his profits to pay the extortion money to the
music store. That changes his behavior. Maybe he moves, at some cost to
himself and his patients. Maybe, anticipating how vulnerable doctors are to
such extortion absent good tort laws, he goes into some other line instead of
investing all the time and money it takes to get through medical school. That
change of behavior of victims of extortion also destroys or stops the creation
of assets (such as in this case the number of doctors trained to heal us).
That change in behavior and the resulting destruction of value is what the
Laffer Curve is about.  
  
BTW here's a good set of lectures on the Laffer Curve:  
  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fIqyCpCPrvU&feature=related  
  
(h/t Noreen Alladina)  
  
You'll be thankful that it's a more interesting lecture on that topic than
this one:  
  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lWzMyKSIbFY&feature=related  
  
It's a sad entropic fact of the world that destruction is far easier than
creation.

