Copyright (c) 1998 by Nick Szabo  
permission to redistribute without alteration hereby granted

### Introduction

Qualities important to contracting, such as understanding, agreement, and
commitment, are often better communicated nonverbally than via writing.
Violation of an emphatic and well articulated promise is and should be
considered much more egregious than violation of an offhand comment taken as a
promise, or violation of an unread or misunderstood term of a written
contract. Written contracts cannot capture such distinctions, and thus the law
developed for written contracts has not taken them into account.

The law has treated the written contract as a special social relationship.
What is the special nature of a written versus an oral contract? Written
contracts evolved out of oral contracts as a better way to memorize certain
aspects of the oral agreement, the words. This is quite superior to the
memories of principles or witnesses.

Witnesses are even worse when it comes to nonverbal communications. Unless
they are very good actors, they must first tranlate the nonverbal into a
verbal description -- a very lossy process indeed.

So nonverbal communications, rich in contractually relevant information but
unreliable in the the era of witness memory, was deemphasized further in the
paper era. Now for the first time we have the ability to record all external
aspects of a contractual agreement.

This will not happen overnight. The law needs to develop an art of
interpreting audio and video, just as it developed an art of interpreting
text. We need to develop an art of drafting multimedia contracts just as we
developed an art of written contracts. And we need to be learn to develop
"video literacy" skills, and distinguish between people of high skill (such as
actors) and low skills.

### The Promise of Multimedia

Distinguishing innocent mistake from fraud is a problem common to law and
governance. A proposed behavior the promisor is clear about and committed to
is, absent fraud, much more reliable than behavior the promisor has only vague
knowledge of or lukewarm commitment to. The emphasis, intention, and knowledge
indicated by a visual account thus give the adjudicator much better
information with which to disambiguate error from fraud. Video also vividly
freshens the memory of the principles as to their state of mind and
possibility of misunderstanding, so that the issue need not be taken to a
third party. Video contracts may thus serve to greatly reduce the transaction
costs associated with negotiating, committing to, and performing on
agreements.

Practical experiment to try: next time you buy a used car, insist on
videotaping the claims and promises! (It may help to call ahead of time and
sign an agreement that you can't publish the tape -- even then it will likely
be a rare gem to find a sales rep who will agree to this!)

Two examples of political videotape well known in the U.S. illustrate my
point. The first, George Bush's infamous "read my lips -- no new taxes!"
promise. Bush's emphatic assertion convinced voters the first time, and doomed
him the second time when he had violated this promise. The fact that Bush
committed fraud, rather than merely made a mistake, was clear enough for even
the distant scattered electorate to see.

A more recent example (this is only meant to illustrate my point, not take a
position, so please don't turn this into a Clinton scandal flame war!) is Bill
Clinton's wagging his finger and declaiming, "I did not have sex with that
woman!" Some are now embarrassed to have relied on this promise that the
scandal would soon be debunked. As with Bush it clearly demonstrates an
intentional falsehood rather than mere mistake or misunderstanding. It is this
piece of videotape, more than the detailed sexual descriptions or legal
technicalities of Starr's report, that form the main popular case against
Clinton.

Non-commercial relationships may also be improved. Consider, for example, the
emotions and intentions involved in a marriage commitment: much easier to
capture on high quality video/audio than on paper. New forms of public and
private marriage ceremony, adapted for visual and aural capture of emotion,
intention, understanding, and commitment, may greatly improve the process of
resolving marital dispute. A "video prenup" ceremony performed in private, or
among a few close witnesses, may bridge the gap between cold prenuptial
agreements and marriage ceremonies full of warmth but empty of concrete
commitments.

### Recovering the Meeting of the Minds

In written contract law, every term in a written contract is usually
enforceable. Parties are charged with understanding the meaning of these terms
before agreeing to them.

The reality, which videotaping would starkly reveal, is that lay people don't
read most of the contracts drafted by lawyers, any more than most Windows
users edit the Registry. To deal with the fact that such written contracts
usually do not actually constitute a meeting of the minds, we have a host of
regulatory restrictions on enforceability, often under the rubric of "consumer
protection" or "labor relations". In this context "consumers", "labor", etc.
denote lay people who sign laywer drafted contracts. The paper law has
developed all these "epicycles" to deal with the fact there is so often little
actual meeting of the minds.

One unfortunate consequence of such regulation is that it further encourages
laymen to sign contracts they don't read or understand, confident that the
fine print doesn't give away their firstborn child, or a thousand other
possible horrors. Thus regulation has caused contract law and practice to move
further away from the idea that there must be a meeting of the minds.

Instead of all these regulations, a more general but perhaps too radical
approach would have considered lay people, when unassisted by their own
lawyers and signing contracts drafted by other lawyers, to be "wards of the
court" for the purposes of enforcing such contracts. The assymetry here
between a lawyer and a layman is very similar to the assymetry between an
adult agreeing to a contract with a child, or that between a C++/Registry
hacker and a Windows user.

We can now take a less radical approach and integrate video as a contractual
medium co-equal to text to record whether, among other things, the layman
actually understands the contract he is signing. Lawyers would then be forced
to draft user-friendly contracts. This would follow the route blazed by Greg
Burch's splendid example of seamen as wards of the court. Instead of lumping
people into starkly unequal classes like "wards of the court", or ruthlessly
enforcing terms a supposedly equal party didn't understand, the amount of
assymetry involved in each particular contract becomes recorded on video and
thus part of the contract itself.

### A Phosphorecent Bright Line

The "bright line" defining the scope of the contract even more important in
the digital era, as we move from boundaries defined by pieces of paper to
boundaries defined by computer user interfaces and the scope of data
encompassed by a digital committment protocol. The interface must be user-
friendly and should unambiguously correspond with the committed data.

Where we may disagree is over whether the medium should be limited to text. I
argue that audio and video clips of clear, well-defined extent, agreed and
committed to at the same time as the text, should constitute an enforceable
element of the contract co-equal to text.

If the outcome of contract disputes becomes less predictable, people will use
contracts less oftne. We must develop the arts of drafting and interpreting
multimedia contracts with this in mind. For example, the different media
should reinforce and disambiguate each other, rather than contradict, just as
one part of a contract's text should not contradict another.

"Drafting" using recordings of the parties, would become the art of developing
informal protocols between these parties, such as those examining the
interaction between the parties and the text. For example, a series of
questions and answers between parties would both test their understanding and
help clarify misunderstood aspects of the contract. The mere video record of a
party reading a contract could serve a function much like the little ____
initial boxes put beside important sections in a contract. Except that the
recording, including recording the eye movements of the party, is much more
comprehensive than the little boxes.

### Caveats

Video survelleince puts privacy in grave jeopardy. Video reordings should be
known, selective, and ceremonial rather than hidden, ubiquitous, and of raw
life.

There is great potential for ambiguity in high bandwidth, in-person social
interaction. This could gravely impact the enforceability of video contracts
based on such interaction. Much of the ambiguity may stem from our poor memory
of such events, as well as from the immature state of audio and video
interpretation and composition skills for legal purposes. I suspect the wealth
of new information far outweighs potential intractable ambiguities.

### Conclusion

Understanding, agreement, and commitment, are often better communicated
nonverbally than via writing. Thus video contracts can serve to greatly reduce
the transaction costs associated with negotiating, committing to, and
performing on agreements. In combination with ceremonies such as question and
answer, video leaves recorded evidence of understanding. Verifying the extent
of understanding may allow a Kuhnian paradigm shift, collapsing the
"epicycles" of law developed to work around the fact that complex written
contracts, drafted by lawyers, no longer constitute a meeting of the minds
with a layman. In short, video adds an unprecedented new medium and will take
its place co-equal to text in the drafting and interpretation of contracts.

In summary, I propose that video will come to augment, and sometimes even
replace, the use of written contracts. The oral agreement, the handshake, and
other indicators of agreement and commitment can be captured in a medium now
as reliable as paper. With upcoming technologies, the recording, organization,
and retrieval of video records will be more user friendly than a typical
written contract. Video records of raw or ceremonial negotiations and
commitment can communicate to principles and adjudicators readily recognizable
and valuable information about the meeting of minds. Video will thus play an
important role in smart contracts, and should take its place in the legal
system beside written contracts.

### Acknowledgements

My thanks to Gregory Burch, J.D. for his many useful comments and examples.
Nick Szabo's Papers and Concise Tutorials

