(continuing)  
  
Nor is innovation the only thing necessary for economic health -- even more
important is preserving our already highly evolved institutions, especially in
scientifically intractable social areas, from naive innovation in the name of
cargo-cult science. The main output of post-Sputnik "science" has not been
innovation but rather a blizzard of regulations that have helped drive
extraction and manufacturing out of developed countries.  
  
So to summarize there have been least four sources of the brain drain from the
engineering and other technical fields which produced higher rates of
innovation in agriculture, extraction, transport, and manufacturing in the
past:  
  
(1) increasing education of and access to cheap BRICs and developing world
labor and a resulting poor incentive to automate the basic industries;  
  
(2) a "basketball star" effect that makes the Internet look more lucrative to
young people than it really is (as with professional sports or acting where a
handful of high-salary stars dominate the news);  
  
(3) the radically increased government funding of "science" post-Sputnik and
the resulting explosion of useless, cargo-cultish IQ contests again at the
expense of engineering and other practical and innovation-producing pursuits;
and  
  
(4)a blizzard of "science"-based environmental, safety, etc. regulations that
has driven many extraction and manufacturing industries out of the developed
world, in response to the plethora of moral panics (regarding health,
environment, climate, etc.) based on "science", i.e. based on scare stories
reviewed by fellow cargo-cult science members (to use Feynman's apt phrase)
and thus "consensus science" that outsiders are expected to accept on blind
faith.  
  
(to be continued)

