Why did agricultural civilization remain mired in the Malthusian trap for over
5,000 years? And how was it possible to eventually escape from it? Recall the
Malthusian isoclines and how various kinds of societies can be situated along
them (click to enlarge all graphs):  
  
  
  
Plagues move the economy “northwest” along the isoclines, as more marginal
lands are abandoned leaving the fewer people to work and share the more
productive lands. Births beyond replacement by contrast move the economy
“southeast” towards higher population, the use of more marginal lands, and
thus a lower standard of living. Here, for example, is a graph using actual
statistics for English real farm labor wage income from 1260 to 1849. Even
though England during this period was slowly escaping from the Malthusian trap
-- note that each 80 years has advanced farther "northeast" than the previous
80 -- it still followed the basic Malthusian pattern of births and deaths.
Observe how the real wage greatly increased after the Black Plague in the
mid-14th century, then slowly declines thereafter:  
  
  
  
Much less well appreciated than the effects of births and plagues with respect
to the Malthusian isocline are creation and destruction of productive capital.
Every act of plowing, sowing, weeding, and so on was a seasonal capital
investment, and the resulting harvest (and thus the short-term isocline)
depended on the qualities and quantities of these short-term investments, as
well as on vagaries of pests, weather, etc. Longer-term capital investment
could include conditioning, fertilizing, and draining soil, buying livestock,
breeding crops and livestock, watering meadows, and so on. Long term progress
towards the "northeast" depended on long-term accumulation of capital. It was
exceedingly rare to maintain such progress over long periods of time, and the
British capital accumulation over such a long period, leading to the breakout
from the Malthusian trap, was unprecedented.  
  
Good harvests caused progress that was temporary unless the food was stored
and long-term capital investment was substituted for investment in next year’s
harvest as well as other pursuits such as luxury and military buildup.
Productive innovation, whether institutional or technological, also led to
moving the isoclines “northeast”, as they made capital more secure or
productive.  
  
  
  
Poor harvests (from pests, poor weather, etc.) caused a setback that was
temporary as long as it didn’t lead to the destruction of capital. If it
resulted in starvation, the deaths boosted the economy up the isocline, so
that the standard of living of the remaining population in subsequent years of
better harvests was higher than with prior better harvests at higher
populations.  
  
Destruction of productive capital was for most of agricultural history as
common as creation of capital. Causes included high rents and taxes that
forced a choice between going hungry and consuming capital. War (quartering
and foraging of troops, destruction of enemy crops and livestock, etc.) was a
frequent cause of capital destruction. Some kinds of capital, e.g. livestock
and the fertility of the soil, could be destroyed simply by being neglected.  
  
Mancur Olson distinguished between societies of “roving bandits”, where
nomadic rulers stole the surpluses of foragers or farmers wherever they went,
and “stationary bandits”, who controlled a specific area and simply taxed that
area. Rational stationary bandits taxed only to the Laffer maximum, because
any further taxation actually reduced their revenues. Indeed, because over-
taxation resulted in the destruction of capital, a secure rational stationary
bandit reduced taxes below the short-term Laffer maximum to prevent lower tax
revenues in future years. Roving bandits, on the other hand, stole nearly all,
resulting in destruction of nearly all capital, because anything insecure that
one roving bandit didsn't steal was stolen by another.  
  
Stationary bandits did not always confine themselves to taxation that resulted
in no destruction of capital. Uncertainty over future power could cause a
leader to get greedy and tax at capital-destroying levels while they were
still in power. Threats of assasination, coup, or conquest could move
stationary bandits closer to roving bandits, since the bandits lost their
future revenues if they lost power or territory: in such cases they rationally
taxed far higher than the Laffer maximum, usually destroying much capital in
the process.  
  
  
  
As a result, we can characterize societies and locate their isoclines based on
their mode of banditry. This often gets confused with the mobility of
production, and the two usually coincided, but they could and often were
distinct. Thus most pastoral societies, based on moving livestock from pasture
to pasture, also featured roving banditry. And societies based on fixed arable
agriculture were generally controlled by stationary bandits. But early modern
Britain was a semi-pastoral society but with stationary bandits. And Dark Ages
Europe featured roving bandits from pastoral societies frequently conquering
arable societies, and being conquered in turn, resulting in a move to a lower-
capital society with a mix of roving and stationary banditry.  
  

#### The Problem of Edible Capital

  
Of all the ways in which capital can be destroyed, the hardest to avoid, in a
hard year, was eating it. Eating your milk cow or your draft animal was like
eating your seed corn: very unwise but very likely if your alternative was
imminent starvation.  
  
The temptation to eat your capital created vicious cycles of capital
destruction. Capital destruction lowered labor productivity, which meant that
people produced less calories per calories consumed. This moved the Malthusian
isoclines “southwest”, which meant even more people starved during the next
equally bad year. War and excessive taxation could trigger or extend the
vicious cycle by killing livestock, poisoning farmland, etc.– and rendering
future returns insecure, rendering further destruction of capital more
probable. The vicious cycle of capital consumption during times of famine may
be the main factor that kept ancient agricultural civilizations mired in the
Malthusian trap.  
  
Who owned the capital mattered. Edible capital was much more likely to survive
(and in the short term the starving people less likely to) if the capital was
owned by people who were not themselves starving. Thus, societies living under
the feudal hierarchy of long-term tenancy, where livestock was often owned by
the local lord rather than a peasant, many have maintained themselves farther
above subsistence levels than societies where peasants completely controlled
their own livestock.  
  
Culture was filled with warnings against “eating your seed corn.” Thus, as one
example of many, Aesop’s stories of “The Goose That Laid the Golden Egg.” It
was also filled with warnings about the importance of saving up for bad times,
e.g. “The Ant and the Grasshopper.”  
  
Conversely, capital creation that increased labor productivity increased the
calories produced per calories consumed, moving the Malthusian isocline up and
right. With storage of food it also freed labor for further capital creation,
which in future equally good years in turn freed further labor for ancillary
or non-agricultural capital investment (transportation, manufacturing,
financial services, etc.). However, for nearly all of agricultural history the
vast majority of this surplus went to population growth, military expenditure,
and luxury display rather than capital investment.  
  
Thus, until the British breakout, agricultural societies remained in the
Malthusian trap. Prior agricultural socieities lacked an institutional ratchet
that could incentivize capital creation in good harvests, but prevent too much
capital destruction in bad harvests. And they generally lacked low-cost
protection from foreign wars, so that stationary bandits often started to act
more like roving bandits when faced with threats of conquest. To escape the
trap, capital creation must exceed capital destruction to such an extent that
farm labor productivity grows faster than population. How Britain did this I
hope to explore in future posts.

