  
  
Research In Motion, Ltd. of Canada, the maker of the BlackBerry, has settled
with NTP over its patent lawsuit for $612.5 million. Hopefully unlike the
previous settlement this one will stick so that Americans can use our
BlackBerries clear of these clouds.  
  
There were many interesting issues in this case, including cross-border
infringement. Two other interesting parts of this case were the court's
refusal to order an injunction and the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
(PTO)'s re-examination of NTP's patents. Any settlement would almost surely
have been far higher if the injunction had gone through and if the PTO had not
started rejecting NTP's patent claims. The importance of the "CrackBerry" to a
wide variety of business and government operations could have worked greatly
in NTP's favor, since the cost of shutting down BlackBerries in the United
States could have cost RIM billions, but it also helped convince many
politicians, who pressured the USPTO and perhaps the judge, that there was no
way to shut down the network without disrupting some emergency services in the
U.S.  
  
It will be interesting if we learn to what extent RIM's stated ability to
quickly replace its software to avoid NTP's patents, in the event that the
court did order a shutdown of the United States part of the network, was
reality or a bluff. This was again a double-edged argument as on the one hand
RIM hoped to convince NTP an injunction would not cost it billions, but on the
other hand it might have convinced the judge that a shutdown would not cause
the feared disruptions.  
  
The strategic landscape regarding this settlement was as a result of all these
factors, and more, quite interesting. As I am fascinated by civil procedure
and settlement strategy, I will probably be posting more about the strategy in
this case in the near future.

