One of the more interesting and well-documented events of recent human
evolution is the rise of adult lactase persistence, which allows some of us to
fully digest milk as adults. All mammalian young, including human, can digest
the sugar lactose found in their mother's milk. Essential to this digestion is
the enzyme lactase. However, mammals typically lose this ability after being
weaned, as a regulatory genes turns off expression of the lactase gene. This
loss of lactase production, and thus of lactose digestion, also occurs in most
humans: most adults who consume milk don't digest most of the lactose due to
insufficient lactase enzymes, and often develop digestive discomfort, a
condition called lactose intolerance. However, at least once in Africa, once
in Europe, and possibly in Arabia arose alleles in the regulatory gene that
kept the lactase in production in adulthood. The spread of these new alleles
probably occurred in cultures that already had domesticated milk-producing
herds, the milk from which played a crucial role in their childrens' diets and
indirectly in adult diets via fermentation (which, at some cost, convert some
but not all of the lactose to molecules more readily digested by adults).  
  
The lactase regulation mutation that spread most dramatically was in Europe,
until by now it occurs in nearly the entire population of northwest European
countries.  
  
 _Modern frequency of lactase non-persistence as percent of the population in
Europe._  
  
This European lactase persistence allele soon came to be most concentrated
along the Baltic and North Seas, what I call the core area of lactase
persistence. Due to the heavy use of cattle in the core region, lactase
persistence spread rapidly there, surpassing half the population by about 1500
BC.  
  
The European lactase persistent populations played a substantial role in world
history. The Baltic and North Sea coasts were the source of most of the
cultures that conquered and divvied up the Western Roman Empire in the fourth
through seventh centuries: Angles and Saxons (founded England), Ostrogoths and
Lombards (Italy), Visigoths (Spain), Vandals (conquered north Africa),
Frisians (the Low Countries) and Franks (France) among others. Later the
lactase persistence core would produce the Vikings, who explored and conquered
from Russia to North America and as far south as the Mediterranean, and the
Normans, who invaded England, Sicly, and southern Italy led the Crusades among
other exploits. Still later mostly lactase persistent populations would found
the worldwide Portuguese, Spanish, French, Dutch and British empires and
originate the agricultural and industrial revolutions.  
  
_Estimated spread of the European lactase persistence allele in the core
region in northern Europe over time._  
  
This was by no means the only gene evolving in the core. Indeed, the same
cattle-heavy agriculture of northern Europe, probably originating in and
migrating from central Europe, also gave rise to a great diversity of genes
encoding cow milk proteins.  
  

> We found substantial geographic coincidence between high diversity in cattle
milk genes, locations of the European Neolithic cattle farming sites (>5,000
years ago) and present-day lactose tolerance in Europeans. This suggests a
gene-culture coevolution between cattle and humans. [ref]

  
  
 _(b) diversity of cow milk protein alleles, (c) frequency of human lactase
persistence._  
  
Associated with the lactase persistence core was a unique system of
agriculture I call quasi-pastoralism. It can be distinguished from the normal
agriculture that was standard to civilization in southern Europe, the Middle
East, and South and East Asia, in having more land given up to pasture and
arable fodder crops than to arable food crops. Nearly all agriculture combined
livestock with food crops, due to the crucial role of livestock in
transporting otherwise rapidly depleted nutrients, especially nitrogen, from
the hinterlands to the arable. However, as arable produces far more calories,
and about as much protein, per acre, civilizations typically maximized their
populations by converting as much of their land as possible to arable and
putting almost all the arable to food crops instead of fodder, leaving only
enough livestock for plowing and the occasional meat meal for the elite.
Quasi-pastoral societies, on the other hand, devoted far more land to
livestock and worked well where the adults could directly consume the milk.  
  
Quasi-pastoralism can be distinguished from normal, i.e. nomadic, pastoralism
in being stationary and having a substantial amount of land given over to
arable crops, both food (for the people) and fodder (for the livestock). A
precondition for quasi-pastoralism was the stationary bandit politics of
civilization rather than the far more wasteful roving bandit politics of
nomads.  
  
Compared to the normal arable agriculture of the ancient civilizations, quasi-
pastoralism lowered the costs of transporting food -- both food on hoof and,
in more advanced quasi-pastoral societies such as late medieval England, food
being transported by the greater proportion of draft animals. This increased
the geographical extent of markets and thus the division of labor. England and
the Low Countries, among other core areas, gave rise to regions that
specialized in cheese, butter, wool, and meat of various kinds (fresh milk
itself remained hard to transport until refrigeration). A greater population
of draft animals also made grain and wood (for fuel and construction) cheaper
to transport. With secure property rights, investments in agricultural capital
could meet or exceed those in a normal arable society. The population of
livestock had been mainly limited, especially in northern climates, by the
poor pasture available in the winter and early spring. While hay -- the growth
of fodder crops in the summer for storage and use in winter and spring -- is
reported in the Roman Empire, the first known use of a substantial fraction of
arable land for hay occurred in the cattle-heavy core in northern Europe.  
  
_England's unprecedented escape from the Malthusian trap (click to enlarge)._  
  
Hay, especially hay containing large proportions of nitrogen-rich vetch and
clover, allowed livestock populations in the north to greatly increase. The
heavy use of livestock made for a greater substitution of animal for human
labor on the farm as well as for transport and war, leading to more labor
available for non-agricultural pursuits such as industry and war. The great
population of livestock in turn provided more transport of nitrogen and other
otherwise rapidly depleted nutrients from hinterlands and creek-flooded
meadows to arable than in normal arable societies, leading to greater
productivity of the arable that could as much as offset the substantial
proportion of arable devoted to fodder. The result was that agricultural
productivity by the 19th century was growing so rapidly that it outstripped
even a rapidly growing population and Great Britain became the first country
to escape from the Malthusian trap.  
  
There are thus, in summary, deep connections between the co-evolution of milk
protein in cows and lactase persistence in humans, the flow of nitrogen and
other crucial nutrients from their sources to the fields, quasi-pastoralism
with its stationary banditry and secure property rights, and the eventual
agricultural and industrial revolutions of Britain, which we have just begun
to explore.

