Adam Smith observed how even the most basic of products in 1776, at the dawn
of the industrial revolution in Britain, depended, directly and indirectly, on
the work of thousands of people:  
  

> Observe the accommodation of the most common artificer or day-laborer in a
civilized and thriving country, and you will perceive that the number of
people of whose industry a part, though but a small part, has been employed in
procuring him this accommodation, exceeds all computation. The woollen coat,
for example, which covers the day laborer, as coarse and rough as it may
appear, is the produce of the joint labor of a great multitude of workmen. The
shepherd, the sorter of the wool, the wool-comber or carder, the dyer, the
scribbler, the spinner, the weaver, the fuller, the dresser, with many others,
must all join their different arts in order to complete even this homely
production. How many merchants and carriers, besides, must have been employed
in transporting the materials from some of those workmen to others who often
live in a very distant part of the country! How much commerce and navigation
in particular, how many shipbuilders, sailors, sailmakers, ropemakers, must
have been employed in order to bring together the different drugs made use of
by the dyer, which often come from the remotest corners of the world! What a
variety of labor, too, is necessary in order to produce the tools of the
meanest of those workmen! To say nothing of such complicated machines as the
ship of the sailor, the mill of the fuller, or even the loom of the weaver,
let us consider only what a variety of labor is requisite in order to form
that very simple machine, the shears with which the shepherd clips the wool.
The miner, the builder of the furnace for smelting the ore, the feller of the
timber, the burner of the charcoal to be made use of in the smelting-house,
the brickmaker, the bricklayer, the workmen who attend the furnace, the
millwright, the forger, the smith, must all of them join their different arts
in order to produce them. Were we to examine, in the same manner, all the
different parts of his dress and household furniture, the coarse linen shirt
which he wears nest his skin, the shoes which cover his feet, the bed which he
lies on, and all the different parts which compose it, the kitchen grate at
which be prepares his victuals, the coals which he makes use of for that
purpose, dug from the bowels of the earth, and brought to him perhaps by a
long sea and a long land carriage, all the other utensils of his kitchen, all
the furniture of his table, the knives and forks, the earthen or pewter plates
upon which he serves up and divides his victuals, the different hands employed
in preparing his bread and his beer, the glass window which lets in the heat
and the light, and keeps out the wind and the rain, with all the knowledge and
art requisite for preparing that beautiful and happy invention, without which
these northern parts of the world could scarce have afforded a very
comfortable habitation, together with the tools of all the different workmen
employed in producing those different conveniences; if we examine, I say, all
these things, and _consider what a variety of labor is employed about each of
them, we shall be sensible that without the assistance and co-operation of
many thousands, the very meanest person in a civilized country could not be
provided_ [emphasis added], even according to what we may falsely imagine the
easy and simple manner in which he is commonly accommodated.

Leonard Read used the pencil as an even more startling example of how a simple
20th century product depended on a vast global network of economic relations.
The number of people required, directly and indirectly, to manufacture a high-
technology device, such as a cellphone or laptop computer, is probably in the
millions. Friedrich Hayek explained the fine-grained division of labor that
makes modern technology and wealth possible as a division of knowledge in "The
Use of Knowledge in Society":  
  

> The peculiar character of the problem of a rational economic order is
determined precisely by the fact that the knowledge of the circumstances of
which we must make use never exists in concentrated or integrated form but
solely as the dispersed bits of incomplete and frequently contradictory
knowledge which all the separate individuals possess. The economic problem of
society is thus not merely a problem of how to allocate "given" resourcesâ€”if
"given" is taken to mean given to a single mind which deliberately solves the
problem set by these "data." It is rather a problem of how to secure the best
use of resources known to any of the members of society, for ends whose
relative importance only these individuals know.

Yet there existed a culture, the pre-European Polynesians, which established
self-sufficient economies sometimes not totalling more than a few hundred
people on dozens of small islands int the Pacific. Due to the small number of
people that made up a self-sufficient economy, they did it using technology
and institutions radically different from the agricultural civilizations of
the Eurasian continent where they had come from. The Polynesians did not work
metal: metalworking (for example the mining, smelting, smithing, etc. required
to extract and work iron) requires too much of a division of labor. They used
only the materials readily available on a South Seas island: their houses,
ovens, boats, weapons, etc. were all made out of plants, stones, and animal
parts. Since they lived at a Malthusian equilibrium (which almost every
culture lived under until northwest Europe in the 17th century started a long
climb out of it), their standard of living was on average the same as the
world average -- dirt poor by our standards. This was enough, however, to
produce catamarans that could navigate the South Pacific long before Magellan
and Cook.  
  
Small island economies greatly increased the premium and resulting emphasis on
trade between islands in Polynesia and Melanesia (the Melanesians were an
earlier group of island settlers). When inter-island trade was feasible, large
proportions of resources and attention went into it. The kula ring was a
splendid example of a sophisticated trade institution that developed among
some of the Melanesians.  
  
What's more, the Polynesians could do something that we moderns cannot --
replicate their entire economy from one island to another by packing up their
families, along with a variety of plants and a handful of animals, onto a
handful of catamarans. Could we similarly replicate our entire modern global
economy, or a set of tools that could produce an equivalent result, to, say,
another planet on a handful of rockets? That was the ambition of K. Eric
Drexler's nanotechnology: pack a rocket full of "assemblers": self-replicating
robots that can make almost anything. In the mid-20th century, mathematician
and computer scientist John Von Neumann sketched a theoretical model of a
self-replicating machine -- a self-replicating pattern in the 2-dimensional
world of "cellular automata" (where, among other simplifications, copy
operations come for free). I have long been skeptical of the idea that
physical self-replication can be done with a simple design:  
  

> While going from macroscopic industrial parts proposed by von Neumann, or
the nucleic acids, amino acids and myriad of tertiary biochemicals in
bacteria, to atomic-scale diamondoid parts reduces the search space, and thus
complexity, but this also reduces the degrees of design freedom. It could be
that the search space of diamondoid replicators is so small that there is no
possible configuration of, say, 10 million carbon atoms can copy itself in
practice, when we get down to the details of atomic placement in each
operation. A particularly difficult task in atomic placement for one small
segement of a Stewart platform (eg assembling the ratchet complex) may
necessitate a blowup in the complexity of the platform itself or in the
machinery that brings molecules to and places them for the platform. To be
truly self-replicating we need to close all the loops in the graph of
operations. Attempts to close the last 1% ("vitamins") might introduce even
more open loops than we close. The minimum complexity might easily exceed the
degrees of freedom in the search space, in which case a solution does not
exist.

The seeming simplicity of the the small-island Polynesian economy, lacking a
sophisticated division of production and distribution operations and thus
lacking a highly complex division of knowledge, is in one sense an illusion.
This simplicity was made possible by making intensive use of very high evolved
plant life. The complexity of life is extremely high. The self-sufficiency of
the pre-European Polynesian economy is only possible if agriculture can be
productively accomplished with tools made by the farmer or his friends. There
is no simple design of a pan-assembler or self-replicating device -- the
simplest ones we know of, life, are of extremely high complexity, and it will
be a long time before we create new versions of life, much less artificial
self-replicating machinery, in a lab.  
  
Partially self-replicating machines are, of course, quite possible. The actual
direct and indirect labor required for these machines, like those required for
laptops and cell phones, is in the millions of people, and for many of the
same reasons -- these machines are based on sophisticated microchips and
plastics, among other parts of complex origin. Even if we radically redesigned
every tool and machine we have for our hypothetical self-sufficient
extraterrestrial economy -- and such radical redesign would be utterly
necessary -- it would still likely require hundreds of thousands of people and
gigatonnes of machinery, at least, to have a wealthy yet self-sufficient
economy beyond earth.  
  
Take Smith's coat and Read's pencil, elaborate the required network still
further for today's complex products, and multiply by many thousands of
products -- that is what is required to fill the shelves of your hardware
super-store (in the U.S., Home Depot and Lowe's). Do this again for your
drugstore, your clothing store, etc. You'd have no such super-stores in our
space colony. It would in many ways be quite poor by earth standards.  
  
The Polynesians relied on the ready availability of high-evolved life that
could readily be grown in the native environment (no complex artificial
creations like Plexiglass domes or grow-lights needed), and yet were dirt-poor
by our standards. Modern products generally require elaborate divisions of
labor necessarily involving millions of people. Such an economy cannot be
planned, as numerous attempts to do so demonstrated in the 20th century. A
modern economy requires a decentralized information-transmitting mechanism
such as a market to work. In sharp contrast to the Polynesian small-island
economy, our global economy cannot be easily replicated. We have to make it
work here, or nowhere.

