  
I have written about how the productivity of property, and the institutions
associated with that property, have tended to be greatly improved when that
property was more secure from military and poor quality political intervention
(and how these two interventions were often related). Societies dominated by
different kinds of property thus have formed different kinds of political and
legal structures. For example, modern states whose economies are dominated by
the extraction of oil and other minerals tend to have strong governments, and
correspondingly less freedom and democracy, especially when (as now) the
prices of those mineral deposits are high, probably because mineral extraction
tends to be dominated by up-front rather than operational costs, making it
easy for governments to expropriate the bulk of the surplus.  
  
  
  
Although farming dominated most economies until modern times, medieval city
republics produced a large number of crucial innovations and had a profound
influence on the modern world. Examples included Venice, Genoa, and the
Hanseatic League. These republics were focused on cities and their economies
were dominated by goods (primarily their storage and transport, but also
manufacturing) rather than by farming. As a result, they evolved a set of
unique institutions and a unique form of government, the corporate republic.
These republics were generally focused on cities that secured their goods,
markets, and persons on islands or behind steep mountains. These medieval
republics developed a wide variety of institutional innovations, such as
insurance and the corporate republican form of government, which are crucial
to our modern era.  
  
 _Illustrations: Genoa (top) and Venice (above), foci of the two most
extensive, powerful, and innovative city republics of medieval Europe._

