Joel, it's an interesting approach but I'm quite skeptical that one can make
micron-thin textiles with sufficient tear resistance and the proper optical
properties purely using lunar materials. It has to be tear resistant to be
launched in a high-g regime from the moon and then be unfolded and assembled.  
  
"Fiberglass" used in textile-like materials AFAIK is a composite of glass
fibers and organic polymers. If somebody knows of a reasonably cohesive,
strong, and gossamer-thin textile made purely of glass or basalt fibers I'd
love to be pointed to the specifics. And by "gossamer-thin" I mean that the
textile itself is microns thick, not just the fiber. If it has to be 100
microns rather than 10 microns thick that increases the mass required by a
factor of a ten. And that's before factoring in that glass and basalt are much
denser than Kapton, Mylar, or similar organic materials.  
  
Even if one can make good blinds of pure glass or basalt I'm also skeptical
about the ability to manufacture them without extensive volatile inputs which
are probably much too scarce on the moon. The glass is heated above 1200C
(basalt 1400C) and one needs a way to cool the glass very quickly so that it
will form the proper amporphous structure. One also needs to cool the
machinery. These are tasks for large amounts of air (not pure oxygen, please!)
or liquids. Ingredients for good coolant are probably not available in
sufficient quantities on the moon. Air is also often used in other parts of
the manufacturing process, such as air jets used to form fibers into a mat. To
get air that is not very chemically reactive (e.g. nitrogen) you'd have to go
to the comet or asteroid ice anyway: hauling such vast quantities from earth
is almost surely far too expensive.

