It may help to change Chesterton's fence example around a little, to make it
more of a personal economic decision, while maintaining the degree of
ignorance about the reasons for the fence:  
  
(1) You've inherited a small acreage with a puzzlingly located fence from a
relative you never knew.  
  
(2) You have no clue why the fence is there, but the very sparse estate
records indicate that it cost Z to build.  
  
(3) The property is too remote to visit personally, and the neighbors wouldn't
tell you anyway, so you would have to recruit and pay an investigator at cost
X to learn why the fence is there. You don't have any other information by
which to estimate the probability that the investigator will turn up a
evidence that the fence satisfies your preferences (as opposed to your
relative's former preferences), or the preferences of somebody you might sell
the property to, sufficient to justify maintaining it.  
  
(4) It costs Y / year to maintain the fence, such at the net present value of
the Ys is slightly greater than X, but substantially less than Z.  
  
Should you hire the investigator, or just keep paying the costs of maintaining
the fence? I believe you should just keep paying the costs of maintaining the
fence, assuming you (or somebody you are selling the property to) find the
property generally to be of sufficient value to justify the resulting total of
expenditures on that estate you must make including the cost of maintaining
the fence. In short, you should use the fact that your relative invested Z as
a proxy measure of the value of the fence, discounted by some factor to
reflect the degree to which you or your buyer's preferences may not match your
relative's, some probability (quite uncertain) that the value of the fence
died with the relative, or similar.

