george: _It seems to me that it's only possible to "represent" a homogeneous
group. If a district is deeply divided, it can't be helped that the
"representative" will be working against the interests of many of his
constituents._  
  
This is true, and I'd add that no group is truly homogenous, so it's not
possible to perfectly represent any group. Since even any two people
communicate imperfectly, and have conflicts of interest between them, it's not
even possible for one person to perfectly represent another, albeit such
representation can far more accurately represent any interests than
representing a group. Thus representation distance grows with the size of
group represented. This is also why representation via lobbying on K Street is
usually far more effective than "democratic" representation through elections
with large numbers of voters.  
  
Since the agent represents not only normal economic preferences, but also
preferences to coerce others (e.g. a majority voting to "redistribute" money
from a minority, or a guilt-laden minority even voting to redistribute it from
fellow members of their minority to assuage their guilt), large representation
distance is not necessarily a bad thing.  
  
Indeed, an effectively infinite representation distance is effective
independence, which is often a good thing. We want the legislative, executive,
and judicial branches to operate independently, for example, not for one to
represent the other. However political property rights are a far better way to
achieve indepence or infinite representation distance. Political property
rights turn at least putatively will-based (a representative is supposed to
represent the will of his principal(s)) system into a rule-based system (the
owner must operate within the procedural bounds of his property right).

