The Roman Empire was a military dictatorship. Its emperors came and went in a
relentless spree of assassinations and civil wars (example) that lasted for
nearly 1500 years. One and one-half millennia of violent government extended
across history from the victories of Octavian (a.k.a. Caesar Augustus) over
his rivals in decades before Christ to the fall of Constantinople to the Turks
in 1453. Despite the violence, or perhaps because of it, Roman elites
accumulated vast surpluses and left spectacular monuments unmatched until much
later in European history.  
  
By the opening of the 6th century the city of Rome itself was no longer a part
of the Empire. Instead Italy was ruled by the Goths and the capital city of
the remaining empire, “Romania”, was Constantinople. This city (in modern
times called Istanbul) controlled the strategic straights linking the Black
Sea and the Mediterranean.  
  
No topics dominated the culture of Constantinople so much as (1) the horse
races, and (2) the debate over the relative contributions of the divine and
the human to the nature of Christ.  
  
The debate over the nature of Christ divided Christians into numerous sects:
Orthodox Catholics, Monophysites, Arians, Manicheans, Nestorians, and many
others. The Orthodox Catholics believed that Christ was both God and man,
Monophysites divine only, Arians human only, and there were a dizzying number
of variations on and nuances to these dogmas. Theology was the hottest topic
of debate and biggest motivation for political division and persecution in
Constantinople. Constantinople was dominated by Orthodox Catholics and
Monophysites, while the Arian heresy held by the Goths and Vandals that had
taken over the Western part of the Empire was considered a heresy beyond the
pale. Other positions, such as Manicheaism, were sometimes tolerated and
sometimes not.  
  
With the coming to power of Christianity the brutal gladiatorial fights had
been suppressed and horse racing was now the dominant spectator sport. The
Hippodrome in Constantinople was the main place of public gathering.
Spectators shouted political opinions at the emperor, who in turn used the
crowd to gauge public opinion. Indeed, for the normal citizen, this was the
only form of political participation.  
  
The racing teams and their colors – Red, White, Blue, Green – dated far back
to the early Empire. By the 6th century, the two dominant teams were the Blues
and the Greens. The political nature of the Hippodrome had converted their
fans into political factions. The Blues tended to be government types, land
owners, and Orthodox Catholics (or, during the frequent schisms with Rome,
Chalcedonians). Greens tended to be merchants and Monophysites.  
  
During the reign of Anastasius, in a village in Illyria (probably in modern
Macedonia just north of modern Greece), where the natives still spoke a
passable Latin, lived a young peasant bachelor. Instead of taking up farming
he left the village and came to Constantinople to join the army. Dropping his
humble family name and styling himself “Justin” – “just man” -- he fought in
several wars and was promoted through the ranks of the palace guards.
Eventually he was promoted to Count (head) of the Excubitors, one of the two
palace guard groups.  
  
Justin then adopted his nephew, one Petrus Sabbatius, and brought him to
Constantinople. Sabbatius too dropped his humble name and, aspiring to the
achievements of his uncle and benefactor, restyled himself “Justinian”.  
  
Justin’s master, the emperor Anastatius, was a Green and Monophysite. Justin,
and to an even greater degree his nephew, were Orthodox Catholics (or during
the schism of the time Chalcedonians) who supported the Blue faction.  
  
Anastasius failed to make formal provisions for the succession. His death in
518 threw Constantiople into confusion, as none his three nephews had strong
support. The Manichean eunuch Amantius, Chamberlain to Anastasius, hoped to be
a power behind the throne of his chosen puppet, an obscure character named
Theocritus. The palace guards had traditionally dominated the succession in
Rome, so Amantius needed the support of at least one of the two palace guard
groups, the Excubitors and the Scholarians.  
  
Justin, head of the Excubitors, secretly promised to support Theocritus and
took money from Amantius to bribe the support of influential fence-sitters.
But instead of carrying out this secret plot, Justin lobbied and bullied the
Blues, their Senate allies (most Senators were Blue), and his own soldiers.
Finally winning acclamation of most of the Blues in the Hippodrome, and
fearful acquiescence of the Greens, Justin assumed the purple robes of
emperor.  
  
Roman imperial successions had always been highly irregular, but the ideal of
authority that other political players would most accept is suggested by
Justin’s letter, upon assuming power, to the Pope in Rome: “We have been
elected to the Empire by the favor of the indivisible Trinity, by the choice
of the highest ministers of the sacred Palace, and of the Senate, and finally
by the election of the army.”  
  
To cover his tracks, Justin had Amantius and Theocritus executed, under the
pretext that Amantius (a heretic Manichean, but tolerated under Anastatius)
had insulted the Orthodox Patriarch of Constantinople. He named his nephew
Count of the Domestics. Justinian was a, or perhaps the, power behind the
throne. Falling in love with a repentant prostitute, Theodora, he had Justin’s
quaestor, Proclus, cleverly draft a law that allowed him to marry a former
prostitute while still forbidding such a degrading marriage to other Senators.  
  
Early in 527 AD, Justin fell sick and named Justinian Augustus (co-ruler) and
successor. A few months later, Justin died and Justinian at age 45 became
emperor.  
  
The former Petrus Sabbatius was to lavish his adoptive name and the empire's
treasure on cities new and old, grand buildings, and wars of reconquest. Most
importantly for our purposes, Justinian would plaster his just-sounding name
on a recompilation of Roman law that has profoundly shaped the West down to
our own time.  
  
Coming: Tribonian, John of Cappadocia, revolt, massacre, prostration, and the
the birth of a bloody code.  
  
References  
Procopius, Anecdota (Secret History)  
Procopius, History of the Wars  
J.B. Bury, History of the Later Roman Empire  
Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire

