Alas, a bullet or matchete is far more convincing than a Schelling point. What
set of rights form the Schelling point(s) depends very much on who has the
bigger gun and who is more willing to wield it -- which eventually comes to
depend on institutions and in particular on war and procedural law. So 50/50
may be a Schelling point, but given a bit more assymytry in convingnness or
coerciion, so is 90/10, as in the guy with the gun or the keys to heaven gets
10% of all you make every year -- a Schelling point so common it has a name:
"tithe". The Spanish king claimed 20% of all gold found in the New World at
the time of Columbus. Due to smuggling, this number was later reduced to 10%,
then 5% -- all nice Schelling points, each half the previous. The mix between
royal ability to enforce its law, smugglers' ability to evade it, and
Lafferian consideration, and probably many other considerations, rounded to a
nearby Schelling point, determined the tax rate.  
  
Despite Friedman's complaint that tax and tribute is unprincipally "open-
ended", Schelling points involving tax and tribute have been the overwhelming
norm in history. Despite Friedman's notion that we humans object so much to
coercion, nobody knows of even a single person out the tens of billions of
human beings who have lived long lives on this planet who have ever gone
through them without being either the "giving" or "receiving" end of
substantial coercion. The 50/50 split, or to use the far more common phrase
Friedman avoids, "equality under the law", is the product of an advanced legal
system, imposed by coercion -- it is nowhere remotely close to the direct
outcome of a negotiation in the war of all against all.

