patrick: _Do you think the Fed can actually pull a Volker and raise interest
rates to reduce inflation? It seems our level of debt now is far greater than
the 1980's._  
  
The level of direct U.S. debt as a % of GDP is still far lower than at the end
of WWII, although if we add in unaltered SS and Medicare liabilities it starts
to rival that level. I expect SS and Medicare will be readily solved in
various obscure ways, such as the low-balling formula for CPI. So there's
plenty of room to raise rates. It probably would take only about 6% nominal
rate to make the commodities market tank (e.g. to get oil back to $40 per
barrel).  
  
My evidence for currency hedging is admittedly indirect or ambiguous. Indirect
evidence includes the huge increase in commodity derivatives which can't be
explained by traditional hedging. Ambiguous includes the hedging of expected
future commodity purchases by traditional users of commodities (airlines, meat
packers, etc.). These are hedges against potential price increases, as
measured by current volatility, and there are no separate components for
proving what portion of that volatility is due to monetary factors (naturally
I think this is large) and what portion is due to traditional "fundamentals."
My theory predicts that the proportion of hedged future purchases has
increased, and the scope has increased (i.e. more kinds of goods are
considered linked to commodity prices, including specific baskets of
commodities used in making the good, and thus more of the expected future
purchases of such goods are hedged, than five years ago).

