That's a good paper, thanks for the cite. I especially like the quote "it
would be...foolish not to recognize that [by our modern legal doctrines which
ignore natural law] we have largely lost contact with a way of thinking
characteristic of an earlier era, an era when jurists believed as a matter of
course that positive law should and did stand in harmony with the law of
nature." The same could be said, in even greater degree, about how we've lost
touch with the idea of political property.  
  
Our ignorance of political property is far greater than our ignorance of
natural law, because natural law was a part of the Roman Law and the classical
Greek and Roman philosophy taught in universities, and political property
rights weren't. Our political philosophies largely come from universities, and
while many of them (e.g. Locke, Nozick, etc.) take into account natural law,
none of them take into account any political property rights -- those of the
king generally being the only recognized, and not as what they actually were
in law, property rights, but as some inherent "sovereign" rights of
"government" justified in some other way than as property (divine right,
"social conract", and other obsfucations). Only by studying actual legal cases
from pre-mid-eighteenth century English law and the pre-Reception laws of
other parts of Western Europe, and daring to overcome the instinctive Romanist
ideology that has always pervaded unviersities (which were established in the
first place to study the law codes of the old Roman Empire at its most
totalitarian), can one unearth the crucial idea of political property.

