Long before the invention of coins, the earliest written legal codes take for
granted the existence of commodity money that served both as a medium for
paying fines and compensation and as a unit of account and standard of value
assessing such penalties. The rules throughout the Sumerian “Code” of Ur-Nammu
[1], c. 2100–2050 BC. (about 1400 years before the invention of coinage), show
us that standard weights of silver were being used as a unit of account and
the actual medium of payment: the code specifically requires defendants
adjudged guilty to “weigh and deliver” the specified weight of silver. Over
half of the extant rules specify fine or damage payments in silver. The single
rule specifying a silver payment that allows an alternative medium to be used
calls it out as such: it specifies “he shall bring [a slave woman], if he has
no slave woman, he shall instead weigh and deliver 10 shekels of silver; if he
has no silver, he shall give him whatever of value he has.” (Law 24).  
  
 _  
---  
  
  

_“In Mesopotamia, the adoption of a silver standard that equated measures of
barley with a set amount of silver is illustrated by a rare example of a
spiral coil of silver, lengths of which were snipped off to pay debts.” Given
a standard cross-section, equal lengths of wire gave equal weights of metal.
Coils could be audited by snipping them at random points inspecting the cut
section.[Link]_

  
  
  
_  
A medium for paying fines and damages implies that the recipient (for example
the king for a fine, or the victim for compensation) could use that medium in
further useful payments – likely for inheritance, tax, religious tithe,
tribute, and exchange, among other transactions. (These transactions, and how
money emerges from them, will be discussed in future posts). Indeed, the
frequency with which a an intermediate good is used as a medium for paying
legal penalties may serve as a useful proxy for how much value that good adds
(i.e. how much in transaction costs its saves) to other transactions
(including but not limited to legal penalties) involved in the circulation of
that good.  
  
    

Penalty

|

Frequency  
  
---|---  
  
Weigh and deliver weight of silver

|

19  
  
Death

|

4  
  
Defining state of slavery

|

2  
  
Return of same or similar (measure and deliver volume of grain for injury
involving grain)

|

2  
  
Variable damages

|

2  
  
Misc.

|

2  
  
Unknown or no compensation

|

6  
  
  

  _Frequency of penalties in the “Code” of Ur-Namma [1]_

  

  

###   **An Indo-European example: the Old Hittite laws**

  

Penalty

|

Frequency  
  
---|---  
  
Weight of silver

|

71  
  
Number of slaves

|

10  
  
Enslavement

|

4  
  
Death

|

11  
  
Volume of barley

|

6  
  
Return objects in same or similar form as item(s) found or stolen

|

40  
  
Storable food (sheep, bread, and beer)

|

3  
  
Sheep

|

7  
  
Land

|

4  
  
Estate division (land, slaves, livestock)

|

5  
  
Variable damages

|

10  
  
Misc.

|

7  
  
Unknown or no compensation

|

18  
  
  
  

_Frequency of penalties in the Old Hittite Laws (c. 1650-1500 BC: still over
800 years before the invention of coinage) [2]_

  
  

  

**The ubiquity and deep age of compensation culture** [3]

  

Institutions of blood money and compensation via standard forms of wealth for
other injuries have been observed and recorded by missionaries, traders, and
ethnologists in every branch of humans, including all major divisions of
humans that left Africa as well as many who stayed. It is possible that this
ubiquitous geographical scope reflects a shared cultural influence that is
more recent than our shared ancestry in Africa (c. 70,000 BC) but prior to
Columbus and Magellan. More likely, it reflects a common cultural and genetic
heritage dating back to at least 70,000 BC before the exit of the ancestors of
today’s Austronesian and Eurasian peoples from Africa. This is also suggested
by the deep age and continuity of the shell bead tradition detailed here.
Shell beads were the predominant form of compensation money in cultures that
migrated out of the African and Eurasian core before the dawn of livestock
agriculture and metallurgy, to such diverse places as Melanesia and the
Americas. These patterns will be laid out in detail, from descriptions derived
from traveler, missionary, and ethnographic literature, in future post(s).

  
  
---  
  
  

_‘Shell-money "Bakhia", Solomon Islands, used as "blood money"’ [Link]_  
  
  
  
  

**Customary prices**

  

Prior to the rise of efficient competitive markets, prices for goods were
often specified by custom or law rather than negotiated. This served to
conserve transaction costs in a high transaction cost culture where exchange
relationships   resembled bilateral monopolies more closely than they
resembled spot markets.  Bargaining costs were high, and indeed bargaining
failure often resulted in violence and destruction rather than merely in no
deal. This made focal points of negotiation, such as customary prices and
customary compensation amounts for specific injuries, a quite valuable and
ubiquitous part of most Neolithic and earlier cultures.  When specified by
law, these rules setting prices were often intermingled with laws specifying
legal penalties and used the same set of units: in the Mesopotamian and
Anatolian law codes prior to coinage, most commonly weights of silver and
volumes of barley.

  

Price unit

|

Frequency  
  
---|---  
  
Weight of silver

|

68  
  
Volume of barley

|

6  
  
Number of sheep

|

7  
  
Labor or military service appurtenant to land

|

11  
  
Other

|

1  
  
  

_Frequency of legally specified prices and rents in the Old Hittite Laws [2]_

  

  

One can also think blood-money-type fixed damages (compensation) and fines as
customary prices for injuries. As with customary prices for goods, customary
prices for injuries conserved on the transaction costs of bilateral monopoly
negotiations, in this case negotiations to settle legal disputes. Today this
is solved, to the extent it is, by each side predicting what damages or
punishments they expect a court to assess, and negotiating accordingly.

  
  
---  
  
  

_Copper spirals and gold discs, 4th millenium BC, Austria. Spiral armbands
were among the earliest items worked from native copper, in what are now
Serbia and Hungary, c. 5000-4500 BC. [Link]_  
  
###  

**Estimating deterrence and fairness: eye-for-eye vs. measured punishments**

  

As kings and chiefs gained power, fines paid to them for criminal acts
replaced compensation to victims. In some cases a separate set of laws (for
example tort laws) arose alongside the criminal law, or was evolved from the
previous compensation culture, maintaining some compensation for victims.
Subsequently law usually evolved away from monetary compensation and towards
punishments for deterrence.  A chief concern of criminal law became estimation
of deterrence value. The king had incentives to perform punishments both as a
public good and a public show. To allow themselves and their public to assess
the deterrence value of punishments, there were two major strategies:

  

·      “Eye for an eye”-type laws, which focus on comparing the punishment to
the crime’s injury (often similar to the injury to maximize perceived
fairness, but sometimes also more severe than the injury for extra deterrence
value). In some of the non-silver compensation rules in the Mesopotamian and
Hittite law codes described above, barley, slaves, or other goods are
substituted for silver because in order to correspond to an injury involving
barley, slaves, etc.: like for like.

·      Measured punishments, which, like monetary compensation for injury,
allow the severity of different crimes to be compared and ranked, for example

o   Whipping (number of lashes)

o   Prison sentences (length of time), our dominant modern form of criminal
punishment

  

As suggested above (and for reasons to be explicated in future posts),
compensation according to a standard amount of a standard wealth good (pre-
coinage money), the outcome of coercive negotiations between clans, was very
likely the dominant form of measured punishment during the vast majority of
the time and in the vast majority of cultures from the dawn of our species to
today.

  
  
  
---  
  
  

_In Northern Europe, blood money and other compensation for injury was known
as “wergeld”.   If the guilty party didn't have the money on hand, they needed
a money-lender._ ****

 |   |  |  |  
  
  

**Markets and the rise of variable damages**

  

There was very little change between the Old Hittite Laws of (c. 1600 BC) and
the New Hittite Laws (c. 1200 BC).  But between then and the Roman Twelve
Tables (c. 400BC) there was a radical shift away from fixed fees and towards
variable damages, assessed by judge or jury. This evolution was coincident
with the rise of coinage, probably due to the shift of trade in a wide variety
of goods away from bilateral and hierarchical relationships and towards
competitive marketplaces. Market deals were facilitated by being able to
transfer metal in branded form (coins) instead of the cutting and weighing of
coils or hack-silver or the laborious counting of shells (or error-prone
approximations by length) which had dominated exchange up to that time. The
lowering of negotiation costs by marketplaces, coins, and other developments
substantially decreased the use of customary prices in favor of prices
negotiated in a market.

  

To be continued!

