"contrary to current doctrine, these are not creatures of statute but
fundamental rights that may not be constitutionally burdened"  
  
In my hasty comments I should at least note that I fully agree that these
writs are not creatures of _statute_. They are writs that arose from the king
granting private jurisdictions and other political powers to lords and
corporations, and from the lords and corporations retaining such powers by
prescription, and the need for English courts (mostly the king's courts, since
these were mostly the king's grants) to resolve property disputes involving
these political property rights. Parliament's role was tertiary for most of
that history, despite the famous statute of Quo Warranto (limiting the power
of the king to declare franchises forfeit under quo warranto) and a few
similar forays.  
  
However, it is a big step further to say that they are rights any citizen can
sue for in court. I'd say offhand this is much more likely for trespass writs
(e.g. prohibitio and habeus corpus) than quo warranto, since in medieval and
Renaissance England only the king (and perhaps more generally an upstream
grantor of the property right) could bring a quo warranto action. (Think of
"prohibitio" as an as-applied challenge to jurisdiction by a party to a case
-- a single case of trespass -- whereas quo warranto challenged the title to
the entire property).  
  
It would be a quite odd twist to treat a mythological entity like "we the
people" as the upstream grantor, but many even less plausible legal fictions
have been invented and proven to be useful, and to the extent this was
actually the law in the U.S. it should be at least looked into. In any case at
the end of the day it's proven history in solving disputes, not theoretical
plausibility, that should win the day in law.  
  
A very interesting and important topic indeed; more in August. :-)

