Great comment, thanks. I observe self-delusion to be real, and indeed common,
and it would be very interesting if it implied multiple egos lacking a "master
ego" to control them. In any case, the game is played by an individual person,
not an individual ego. A non-unitary consciousness raises a number of thorny
problems. For example, can the egos control each other? If the Self-Deluder
intends and the Knower knows this intent is a self-delusion, then intent might
be imputed to Knower as well, depending on how the game rules or the referee
define "intent".  
  
Assuming some external evidence of intent, such as promise, it would
definitely be imputed to this individual by the law, which takes no cognizance
of multiple egos (at least if the person is sane and the only symptom is
common self-delusion). Indeed, this is one of the vague aspects of "intent" --
is it really a known internal mental state or is it, as in law, just a
statement about a class of mental states we infer from external action?.
Albeit almost all of us an even some other animals are mentally wired to make
such inferences: as Justice Holmes quipped, even a dog can tell the difference
between being kicked and being stumbled over.  
  
Getting somebody or something to force you to do it is basically what I meant
by credible commitment. There is, however, a difference between intending to
do it yourself at 11 AM and intending that it be done to you at 11 AM. You
could, for example, take pills at 7 AM that release the toxin at 11 AM. But
does that really constitute intending to drink the toxin at 11 AM? If it could
be so construed we could more narrowly word the rules of the game, to talk
only very specifically of drinking the toxin yourself from a cup at 11 AM
under no coercion, and intent to do same, to eliminate most and perhaps all
possibilities of credible commitment. An interesting exercise in legal
drafting. :-)

