Jim, I do appreciate your comments, and I'd love to learn more over beer (but
not until August -- bar exam :-).  
  
I have extensively studied barter and money systems (in addition to working
for David Chaum and playing a major role setting up a certificate authority)
and do believe I have some insights.  
  
Chief among these I recommend extensive thinking about mental transaction
costs and proxy measures. (See links in original post or Google any of these
phrases with my name to get my articles). A gigabyte is a gigabyte, Paris
Metro pricing, and quality-of-service metrics are examples of proxy measures
-- there are again a very large number of possibilities.  
  
Along with many ways to measure a given resource, there are a wide variety of
other Internet resources that might be commoditized: screen real estate, ad
keywords, response time, CPU cycles, and much more. Setting up a general
nanobarter architecture would be an interesting open source project in its own
right -- it need not be just an expensive adjunct to a particular application.
The number of ways this architecture could be used are vast and the best
applications are probably not the most obvious ones.  
  
As for complexity, I find it interesting that Donutlab was implemented in just
72 hour hours. One can get prototypes running rather quickly and then
experiment with a wide variety of proxy measures.  
  
As for the design space, it's a good bet that just as with traditional
markets, some parts are desert, some parts are fertile, and some parts are
positively jungle. But with nanomarkets we haven't yet explored any of this
planet beyond site of the first lander. If there are any theoretical reasons
to believe it's mostly desert -- beyond my warnings about the crucial role of
user preferences and mental transaction costs -- I'd love to hear them.

