I agree with Gabriel that it's the positive obligations to act, often in a
quite costly fashion, that make positive rights problematic. Positive rights
require involuntary servitudes.  
  
Adam's comment reflects that many of us still instinctively think of
"liberties" and "rights" as synonomous with negative rights. That's how the
founders thought of rights, so they didn't need a special phrase "negative
rights."  
Of coure, many so-called "progressives" like Roosevelt later disagreed.  
  
George, Roosevelt did pay dollars for the gold, but considering that about a
year later Roosevelt devalued the dollar relative to gold by about 40%, it was
not exactly just compensation. Roosevelt's executive order was a culmination
of the central bank gold hording war that greatly contributed to the
Depression in the first place. Ironically, the order accused its victims of
"hording." The Federal Reserve "won" the hording war and most other central
banks went off gold altogether.  
  
As for the Japanse-Americans, Roosevelt didn't steal their land directly, but
the rapid forced relocation meant that many Japanese-Americans had to sell
their lands for pennies on the dollar. The American economy in general, not to
mention the Japanese-Americans in particular, were deprived of their unique
farming skills. Quite shamefully, most of the Supreme Court's justices, who
had been appointed by Hoover and Roosevelt, held this wholesale and parallel
deprivation of many constitutional rights to be constitutional, in the sordid
_Korematsu_ case. Apparently Americans' "freedom from fear" was also a
positive right that required an acceptable (to Roosevelt and his Supreme
Court) corresponding positive obligation: the obligation as a member of a
feared minority to be deprived en masse of one's constitutional rights.

