The history of the Due Process Clause in the United States' Constitution, and
how it came to cover everything from (at various points in U.S. history)
freedom of contract to abortion, is a long story which I should tell some day,
but here is a very short version. It starts with the idea of a "common law" or
"due process" -- synonyms in late medieval and Renaissance English law. Then
these phrases meant not substantive judge-made law (as "common law" means
today) but a group of procedural rights and principles which courts had slowly
developed through precedent and that all royal courts in England (even to some
extent privately owned courts) were expected to respect. One of these basic
due process principles was that a court could not "take property from A and
give it to B" except as a remedy for a wrong done by A to B. The Due Process
Clause of the 5th and 14th Amendments -- "no deprivation of life, liberty, or
property without due proces of law" -- was meant as a reference to these basic
rights and principles, as well as to the continuing precedential development
of such rights and principles by courts.  
  
The basic idea behind the _Lochner_ line of cases was that minimum wage laws,
maximum hour laws, and such were taking property from one group (e.g. capital)
and giving to another (e.g. labor) even though the one group had done the
other no adjudicated wrong. But since many government laws even in the 19th
century did redistribute rights people value from one class to another like
this, this way of applying due process principles was too broad an attack on
statutory sovereignty and practical politics to work without some compromises.  
  
But it was too late to discover such compromises throught the slow process
deciding disputes and discovering rules, before being swamped by the tide of
Progressive statutory sovereignty. The _Lochner_ line of cases quickly became
hedged about and mutated: the principle involved was later said to be freedom
of contract (both an employer's and a worker's rights were violated by such
laws, rather than the problem being a redistribution without a wrong), and it
was held (even before the New Deal) that a government merely had to come up
with a "rational basis" to justify taking in this loose sense from group A to
give to group B, etc.  
  
After Footnote Four, "merely economic" rights like property were derogated --
it became trivial for government to "prove" a "rational basis." So we now find
"rational basis" applied to most kinds o f rights while an
"important/compelling governmental interest" is applied to important personal
and political rights like contraception, abortion, free speech, voting,
interstate travel, etc. (BTW, that U.S. courts find interstate travel to be a
fundamental right is very interesting in light of the importance of low exit
costs in fostering healthy legal and political competition).  
  
The "rational basis" test is the state of _Lochner_ precedent today -- a
trivial test that "merely economic" laws practically always pass, in contrast
to the "rationality-with-teeth" of personal rights cases like _Lawrence v.
Texas_. Nominally, however, the test of  Lawrence is the same as the test of
Lochner, and both are good law, so that it takes only a court sympathetic with
property rights to revive _Lochner_.  
  
Such a development may take the form of an elephant that is in the room of
modern due process cases -- freedom of contract. Implicit in Griswold, Planned
Parenthood v. Casey, and many other such cases is not only a personal right,
but a freedom of contract that is quite necessarily associated with this
personal right. Without freedom to contract with an abortion provider, the
right of a woman to get an abortion would be unduly burdened. Only this can
explain why a contraception clinic is able to sue for a right to vend, not
merely use, contraception, and Planned Parenthood is able to sue for a right
to provide abortion services, not merely for a right of a woman to have an
abortion.  
  
The same is true for almost any other fundamental right. Our crucial right of
interstate travel, for example, must involve to at least some extent the
freedom to contract with an airline company (buy a plane ticket and travel),
to purchase a motor vehicle, to contract with a car rental company, and so on.
This being the case, our courts should recognize that freedom of contract is
not "merely" an "economic right." It is also a basic political right. Our
courts should recognize a general freedom of contract, which becomes a
fundamental right if it involves a contracting about a fundamental right,
whether that be buying condoms ( _Griswold v. Conneticutt_) or sending our
children to private schools ( _Pierce v. Society of Sisters_).

