Most modern governments have political structures and legal procedures derived
in a long evolution from those of the ancient Roman emperors, with a shallow
overlay of modern democracy. The main exceptions, the Anglo-American
countries, have legal procedures derived primarily from a partially
independent evolution in England, but still with substantial influences from
the old Roman autocrats. Political ideas and legal procedures are closely
related, and versions of these derived from the Roman Empire have dominated
most of European history.  
  
I have started writing a history of this legal and political tradition. It
starts with the Year of the Five Emperors, the rise of the Severan dynasty,
and under that dynasty the first two major jurists (legal authorities) in the
later Roman legal tradition, Papinian and Ulpian. It continues through the
famous Codes of the emperor Justinian (as compiled by his jurist Tribonian),
to the birth of universities in Western Europe upon the rediscovery of
Justinian's codes, through the political philosophies of Bodin and Hobbes, to
the Reception of Roman law into Western Europe, to the Code Napoleon, the
German and Russian legal codes, and modern dictatorships based on the
political and legal ideas of Rome. This will be a sprawling history and indeed
I will probably never finish it. But meanwhile I will post a good bit of it to
this blog, starting with the next post. I expect to proceed largely in
temporal order, but no guarantees. Quite a few of my blog posts over the next
two years may be part of this series. It should be quite enjoyable as well as
provide unique insights into the history of political forms and constitutions.

