Atomic clock on a chip for about $1,500. Accurate and independent clocks
improve secure synchronous protocols, in other words can help securely
determine the order in which events occur on the Internet, wireless, and other
networks while minimizing dependence on trusted third parties like GPS. The
technology nicely complements secure timestamping (see e.g. here, here, and
here) which can leave an unforgeable record of the ordering of events and the
times at which specific data or documents existed.  
  
Bitcoin, an implementation of the bit gold idea (and another example of where
the order of events is important), continues to be popular.  
  
It is finally being increasingly realized that there are many "squishy" areas
where scientific methods don't work as well as they do in hard sciences like
physics and chemistry. Including psychology, significant portions of medicine,
ecology, and I'd add the social sciences, climate, and nutrition. These areas
are often hopelessly infected with subjective judgments about results, so it's
not too surprising that when the the collective judgments change about what
constitutes, for example, the "health" of a mind, body, society, or ecosystem,
that the "results" of experiments as defined in terms of these judgments
change as well. See also "The Trouble With Science".  
  
Flat sats (as I like to call them) may help expand our mobility in the decades
ahead. Keith Lofstrom proposes fabricating an entire portion of a phased array
communications satellite -- solar cells, radios, electronics, computation,
etc. -- on a single silicon wafer. Tens of thousands or more of these, each
nearly a foot wide, may be launched on a single small rocket. If they're thin
enough, orientation and orbit can be maintained using light pressure (like a
solar sail). Medium-term application: phased array broadcast of TV or data
allows much smaller ground antennas, perhaps even satellite TV and (mostly
downlink) Internet in your phone, iPad, or laptop. Long-term: lack of need for
structure to hold together an array of flat sats may bring down the cost of
solar power in space to the point that we can put the power-hungry server
farms of Internet companies like Google, Amazon, Facebook, etc. in orbit.
Biggest potential problem: large numbers of these satellites may both create
and be vulnerable to micrometeors and other space debris.  
  
Introduction to genetic programming, a powerful evolutionary machine learning
technique that can invent new electronic circuits, rediscover Kepler's laws
from orbital data in seconds, and much more, as long as it has fairly complete
and efficient simulations of the environment it is inventing or discovering
in.  
  
Exploration for underwater gold mining is underway. See also "Mining the Vast
Deep."

