

> JOHN, by the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy
and Aquitaine, and Count of Anjou, to his archbishops, bishops, abbots, earls,
barons, justices, foresters, sheriffs, stewards, servants, and to all his
officials and loyal subjects, Greeting.  
>  
> KNOW THAT BEFORE GOD, for the health of our soul and those of our ancestors
and heirs, to the honour of God, the exaltation of the holy Church, and the
better ordering of our kingdom, at the advice of [list of various bishops,
earls, etc. many of them in rebellion at the time]:  
>  
> (1) FIRST, THAT WE HAVE GRANTED TO GOD, and by this present charter have
confirmed for us and our heirs in perpetuity, that the English Church shall be
free, and shall have its rights undiminished, and its liberties unimpaired.
That we wish this so to be observed, appears from the fact that of our own
free will, before the outbreak of the present dispute between us and our
barons, we granted and confirmed by charter the freedom of the Church's
elections - a right reckoned to be of the greatest necessity and importance to
it - and caused this to be confirmed by Pope Innocent III. This freedom we
shall observe ourselves, and desire to be observed in good faith by our heirs
in perpetuity.  
>

  
So seriously did the Norman kings take the theory that they originally owned
all rights in all things corporeal and incorporeal that were appurtenant to
their kingdom, that they "granted" subsets of these rights to God Himself.
Similarly, English kings would in this and future charters "grant" what were
really recognitions of existing rights. In the case of electing bishops,
however, this was a right that had recently been one during the Papal
Revolution wherein the pope across Europe successfully asserted the right,
previously usually practiced by kings and the more powerful feudal lords, to
appoint bishops. This was the beginning of the idea of the separation of
church and state. This separation however never fully took hold in England, as
this part of the Magna Carta was abrogated when the English Church split from
the Catholic Church during the reign of Henry VIII, and even before this time
secular authorities assisted the "English Church" in punishing heresy.  
  
Compare the above clause to clause 13 (this is out of order for the purposes
of comparison):  
  

> (13) The city of London shall enjoy all its ancient liberties and free
customs, both by land and by water. We also will and grant that all other
cities, boroughs, towns, and ports shall enjoy all their liberties and free
customs.

This similar sweeping language recognizing the enjoyment of ancient liberties
and customs (but as individual rights of residents rather than as the
corporate rights of cities) would later occur in many later North American
colonial charters. In that context they were easements in favor or third-party
beneficiaries rather than grants to the parties to the charter as here.  
  
And now to the main clause of the Great Charter:  
  

> TO ALL FREE MEN OF OUR KINGDOM we have also granted, for us and our heirs
for ever, all the liberties written out below, to have and to keep for them
and their heirs, of us and our heirs:

This is the main clause of the first Great Charter of liberties under the
English legal tradition. Unless otherwise specified, every liberty granted by
the Great Charter is granted to all free men in perpetuity. "Free men" roughly
meant all who were tenants rather than villeins (serfs). With the ends of
serfdom and slavery it came to mean all residents, although it was sometimes
construed just to mean all property owners or all citizens. Many modern
property deeds use this same kind of language, albeit the rights they grant
are usually far less valuable.  
  

> (2) If any earl, baron, or other person that holds lands directly of the
Crown, for military service, shall die, and at his death his heir shall be of
full age and owe a 'relief', the heir shall have his inheritance on payment of
the ancient scale of 'relief'. That is to say, the heir or heirs of an earl
shall pay Â£100 for the entire earl's barony, the heir or heirs of a knight
l00s. at most for the entire knight's 'fee', and any man that owes less shall
pay less, in accordance with the ancient usage of 'fees'

The basic idea here is that, in exchange for being subject to military
service, inheritance taxes are reduced to a small fee. Having a tenure such as
fee simple held "directly of the Crown" was as close as you came to outright
ownership under King John. Compared to modern zoning, except for restrictions
on buying and selling you actually had far better property rights under King
John with these "tenures" then we do under modern zoned "ownership." Indeed,
our modern forms of land ownership are just these tenures, under the same
names, e.g. fee simple, with taxes of various kinds instead of "aids" and
"scotage." Arguably modern forms of ownership such as fee simple are held
"directly of" our government instead of the king himself. If the Magna Carta
still applies to those of us living under the English legal tradition, then
arguably under this clause any of us who have ever been registered for the
draft is immune to all but these minimal inheritance taxes. This might
encourage the wealthy to stop bribing their way out of drafts the rest of us
are subject to.  
  

> (4) The guardian of the land of an heir who is under age shall take from it
only reasonable revenues, customary dues, and feudal services. He shall do
this without destruction or damage to men or property...

This clause could come straight out of a modern law and economics textbook.
The problem of "waste," wherein a temporary possessor of property loots it, is
still a big problem in modern property law. It's also a big problem for the
whole country when you have a temporary dictator rather than a king who
expects his heir(s) to take the throne. By the way, the guardianship was
actual alienable property -- once the king or lord granted guardianship of one
of their underage tenants to somebody, that office could be bought or sold as
well as devised or transferred via marriage.  

> > (12) No 'scutage' or 'aid' may be levied in our kingdom without its
general consent, unless it is for the ransom of our person, to make our eldest
son a knight, and (once) to marry our eldest daughter. For these purposes only
a reasonable 'aid' may be levied. 'Aids' from the city of London are to be
treated similarly.

For political scientists interested in the origins of democracy is the most
famous clause of the Magna Carta, along with  
  

> (14) To obtain the general consent of the realm for the assessment of an
'aid' - except in the three cases specified above - or a 'scutage', we will
cause the archbishops, bishops, abbots, earls, and greater barons to be
summoned individually by letter. To those who hold lands directly of us we
will cause a general summons to be issued, through the sheriffs and other
officials, to come together on a fixed day (of which at least forty days
notice shall be given) and at a fixed place. In all letters of summons, the
cause of the summons will be stated. When a summons has been issued, the
business appointed for the day shall go forward in accordance with the
resolution of those present, even if not all those who were summoned have
appeared.

In other words, for the king to collect his rents, i.e. "aid" and "scutage,"
he needed the consent of an assembly of his nobles (which became the House of
Lords) and his other immediate tenants ("those who hold lands directly of us,"
which became the House of Commons). There is no representation at this point
-- all the king's tenants who can take time off to come to give their "general
consent" may do so (presumably by a vote, although whether majority, super-
majority, or full consensus are required to obtain "general consent" is not
specified). From this tradition came the American slogan, "no taxation without
representation." Until recently there was a now neglected symmetry -- no
representation without taxation. Our legislatures originated in both
principles -- that tenants of the realm had the right to collectively
negotiate their rent, and that only tenants who paid rent were entitled to so
negotiate.  
  
To be continued...

