The writ of _habeas corpus_ is an order from a national court to a local
entity that has imprisoned a person to (1) produce that person at the national
court, and (2) provide that court with a good reason for the imprisonment.
_Habeas corpus_ is __ is an extraordinary writ _,_ and for that reason runs
much farther than the normal jurisdiction of the national court. The local
entity commanded by the writ can be _any_ entity within the nation, or any
within any territory of that nation (including military bases), or on any of
the nation's ships at sea: any entity at all that claims the right to detain
people. _Habeas corpus_ is almost a millennium old, and in various forms it is
probably much older. It has been and remains the main way by which legal
rights against the arbitrary detention of a person by any kind of entity are
enforced. _Habeas corpus_ well deserves its other traditional name: the Great
Writ.  
  
Two cases help illustrate how crucial _habeas corpus_ has been to the
development of liberty. The core meaning of the word "liberty" itself is
simply freedom from bodily constraint without due process of law. For many
hundreds of years in legal systems derived from English law, _habeas corpus_
has been the main, and often the only, mechanism by which this most essential
of freedoms has been enforced.  
  
 _Dr. Bonham's Case_ _,_ in 1610, played a key role both in the history of
American and Commonwealth constitutional law and in the ending of the power of
the guilds. Guilds were somewhat like labor unions or business cartels, but
often with an extra power -- the power to themselves convict and imprison
those operating in the guild's business.  
  
Besides guild courts, there were a large number and variety of other franchise
courts in England: church courts, merchant's courts, manorial courts, mining
courts, colonial courts, municipal courts, the courts of private counties, and
so on. The king's courts generally had no jurisdiction to hear appeals from
franchise or military courts except by extraordinary writ -- the most
important of which was _habeas corpus._  
  
Dr. Bonham was imprisoned by the London physician's guild for practicing
medicine in London without their license. _Habeas corpus_ made it possible for
Dr. Bonham to appeal his imprisonment. The Court freed Dr. Bonham, holding
that his due process rights had been violated by the guild: the guild's
conviction had not been obtained before a proper court.  
  
 _Somerset's Case_ , in 1772, played a crucial role in the abolition of
slavery. Somerset was a (former, it was argued) slave (formerly) owned by a
merchant from the American colonies. When Somerset escaped from his master, he
was recaptured and put on a boat for the British territory of Jamaica. An
abolitionist petitioned on Somerset's behalf for _habeas corpus,_ which Lord
Mansfield granted. Still on the high seas, the writ of _habeas corpus_ ordered
the British captain to bring Somerset to London to be produced before the
King's Bench. Slavery was no ordinary kind of property: it was also a
deprivation of bodily liberty. As such, _habeas corpus_ made it possible for
the slave to challenge his status as bodily detained property. The high
court's writ of _habeas corpus_ reached far beyond Great Britain to the United
Kingdom's colonies and its ships as sea. Once Parliament banned slavery across
the British Empire, the Great Writ was crucial in implementing the ban to
abolish slavery throughout that globe-spanning enterprise.  
  
The Great Writ has been often been suspended in areas and periods of warfare,
leading to great abuse but also to the ability to efficiently and ruthlessly
fight the war without the legal overhead. The U.S. Constitution specifies that
_habeas corpus_ may be suspended only by Congress, and only with respect to
invasion or rebellion (it may not be suspended domestically due to a foreign
war or mere domestic crime), and even then only so long as public safety
requires the suspension. Article I (listing the powers of Congress) states:  

> The privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless
when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it. Art.
I, ยง9, cl. 2.

More about the _habeas corpus_ , military detention, and the Military
Commissions Act coming soon in a subsequent post.  
  
 **UPDATE:** Here are some subsequent posts on _habeas corpus_ and the MCA:  
The _Lex Gabina:_ ancient Military Commissions Act?  
Liberty and _habeas corpus_ (II)

