Thanks gwern, that is a very interesting result and quite pertinent to what we
are discussing. From what I can tell from skimming the paper and the
commentary, the result strongly suggests arsenic is being used in place of
phosphorous to _some_ extent in _some_ molecules. It's not clear how many
different kinds of molecules such as ATP, DNA, RNA, phospholipid, etc.
normally constructed out of phosphate are involved. So they haven't proven
that phosphorous in at least some necessary molecules is irreplaceable. Much
more research is needed. Nevertheless the result is very exciting.  
  
It is otherwise a very dramatic story as well. Involving poisons and "aliens"
oh my, so it has the world abuzz.  
  
The basic result of their experiment is that a particular species of
Halomonadaceae bacteria grew 60% as fast on arsenate as on phosphate but
didn't grow at all when deprived of either. Suggesting that arsenate can in
this very arsenic-adapted bacteria substitute for phosphate but only at 60%
efficiency. The reason arsenic is a deadly poison for the rest of us is that
when arsenate substitutes for phosphates in us it degrades molecular functions
of e.g. ATP to such an extent that we soon die as a result.  
  
If life originated where arsenates were more common than phosphates, this
might change the basic ATP-centric theory of origins to a ATA (adenosine tri-
arsenate) theory. However, there are chemical reasons to doubt this (water
tends to break down arsenates far faster than phosphates), so more likely life
originated with phosphorous and has adapted to _partial_ (but not preferred)
use of phosphorous in arsenic-heavy environments like Mono Lake.  
  
Contrary to the "astrobiology" hype in this story, arsenic substitution
doesn't greatly increase the probable frequency of life in the universe, since
arsenic is even less abundant than phosphorous.

