It's shameful for you to claim that I "seem to misunderstand" this -- I don't
-- but you are correct insofar as my example of Crusoe by himself may confuse,
as there are two different no-rights going on here. Crusoe has full freedom
and nobody has any rights against him (because there is nobody to have such
rights). That's the Hohfeldian correlative. (Because Hohfeldian terms are
based on relations between persons, here we have to invoke a "nobody", a null
person, to define the correlative). Crusoe also has no-rights. You're correct
that Crusoe's own no-rights are not the the correlative to his own freedom.  
  
The Crusoe/Dalrymple example of lawlessness -- where there is still full
freedom and no rights between two people -- serves to clarify where the
correlative lies.  
Crusoe's no-rights are Dalrymple's freedom and vice versa.  
  
MH: "Your analysis also suffers from avoiding the distinction between a rights
claim (I say this is my right) and an enforced right (and I'm credibly
threatening you about it.)"  
  
The claim is either frivolous (in the broad sense of being unenforceable,
whether due to its lack of plausibility or for lack of enforcement mechanism)
or a threat of some degree (plausible, credible, or near certain). While those
are important distinctions they are not necessary to understand the basics of
Hohfeld, nor to clarifying Locke's theory.  
  
MH -- "The degenerate case of Dalrymple and Crusoe doesn't fit the model of
rights well because the enforcement is questionable. The better the
enforcement, the closer the right works as a description."  
  
That enforcement is questionable doesn't stop it from being well-defined
logically as a right. Furthermore, there are a variety of scenarios where
Crusoe can enforce his rights against Dalrymple and vice versa. Revenge may be
primitive (and oh so unpopular in a world where we are trained from birth to
trust "the state" for any such thing), but it is hardly nothing.

