(I recently rediscovered this old post of mine and thought it deserved re-
posting).  
  
Paraphrasing Robin Hanson from a recent podcast: _"In gifts, it's common
signals of quality that matter, not private signals of quality."_  
  
Robin Hanson has a great theory for why neoclassical economics so often fails
to explain human relationships and institutions, especially personal
relationships. Why, he asks for example, do guests bring wine to dinner at an
acquaintance's home instead of paying cash, like they would at a restaurant?
Traditional economics cannot explain such basic things.  
  
Instead Robin posits, building on the work of previous economists and
evolutionary psychologists, that signaling dominates most of our relationships
and many of our institutions. In other words, much of our behavior is used to
signal, or prove by our behavior, to our fellows our intelligence, empathy,
status, and so on. In the hunter-gatherer environments in which our genes
evolved, such relationships were far more impportant to our genetic success
than any other aspects of our environment. Thus our behaviors are dominated by
the signals that would have most advantageously (for our genes) developed our
relationships in that environment.  
  
The general theory is sound -- I've held a version of it for quite a long time
-- but many of the conclusions he draws from this theory, such as the above
quote about gifts, are quite questionable. The thoughtful gift, namely the
gift that is targeted towards the recipient's unique preferences, is widely
welcomed as the best kind of gift. "It's the thought that counts" may be a
cliche and an exaggeration, but it nevertheless carries substantial truth. The
thoughtful gift signals our intelligence, our empathy, and the fact that those
skills are being used in favor of the gift recipient.  
  
This (and a second theory described below) explains far better than Robin does
why cash makes such a bad gift. A gift or exchange like bringing wine to
dinner provides the opportunity to signal that one has remembered the dinner
menu, and often also signals that one knows the hosts' wine preferences. Cash
by sharp contrast is the most thoughtless gift. Cash is suitable only for
contractual dealings with strangers; it is worse than useless for developing
relationships.  
  
Gift cards exhibit a modicum more empathy than cash (you have to know your pal
likes Starbucks), but prior generations who put more effort into relationships
considered gift certificates to be rather rude as a personal gift: they were
only considered suitable as, for example, a substitute for a cash wage bonus.
Today, like "friends" links on Facebook, gift cards signal a modicum of
passing fancy which substitutes for the many closer relationships and more
thoughtful gifts that most of our forebears enjoyed.  
  
A second reason that cash makes such a poor gift is that it provides a very
poor emotional and sensory experience. Most signals, as at least indirect
products of evolution, are targeted at our emotions far more than they are
targeted at the intellect. A good wine, for example, will be experienced far
more fondly and thus remembered far longer than a dirty dollar bill. The most
common signals also tend to signal emotional states or skills (e.g. empathy)
far more than intellectual ones.  
  
Per Friedrich Hayek, this emotional infrastructure breaks down when we are
dealing with strangers -- in those cases contractual relationships and "filthy
lucre" are far more efficient and effective ways of relating. But the cold
natures of these transactions, i.e. the fact that these relationships are
divorced from the emotional signals evolution has wired us to expect, explains
much of the political resistance to markets with their "filthy lucre",
"greed", etc. Merchants, property, contracts, and so on are crucial to our
modern economy, but they send the wrong emotional signals to our hunter-
gatherer brains.  
  
Most politics, and in particular the pathologies of politics, are themselves
about instinctive signaling -- for example signaling tribal loyalty on the
right, or signaling altruistic natures on the left. Most political ideologies
freely and fraudulently ignore the crucial distinction between friend and
stranger: in the world of political signaling we are supposed to care as much
about the vast anonymous "poor" as we do about our own children who we well
know to be helpless, and we are supposed to be loyal to a vast country of
hundreds of millions of strangers (including more than a few very strange
strangers) as if they were all familiar kin. In both cases, these are largely
fake signals that don't cost the fraudulent signaler very much: the right-
winger does not actually have to be patriotic, and the left-winger does not
actually have to be altruistic, and in both cases they usually are not. Few of
the children of hawk Congressmen served in the Iraq War, and Barack Obama has
given only a miniscule portion of his income to charity. But they are very
good at making the politically correct noises that most humans emotionally
expect to hear. Thus left-wingers can get great social mileage from calling
right-wingers "greedy", meaning that right-wingers are failing to send enough
altruistic signals, and right-wingers can get great social mileage from
calling left-wingers "unpatriotic." People who, due to real altruism, care
more about the actual consequences of political policies than about sending
the proper social signals to their peers, usually end up being called both
"greedy" and "unpatriotic" in the bargain.

