I also observe that global warming alarmists typically neglect a very solidly
evidenced positive benefit of CO2: that greater CO2 concentrations increase
plant growth. That's a great benefit to agriculture, forestry, and other
necessities and enjoyments we get from plant life. It is alas typical of a
Pascal scam to ignore consequences of the opposite utility.  
  
_Also, there's nothing wrong with argument from authority when the authority
is scientific consensus_  
  
Here we greatly differ. There are some hard sciences, mainly well-verified
parts of physics and chemistry, and some of biology, where authority can be
respected in this manner. There are others of greater complexity and less
predictive power where it should not (e.g. nutritionists who have often made
poorly evidenced consensus recommendations where much later the consensus
changes)  
  
In a study as complex and with so little track record of successful prediction
as climatology, I'm afraid much of it is closer to the speculations of
nutritionists than to, for example, the hard science of DNA sequencing. DNA
being a fairly simple structure (interpreting what complex system or
behavior(s) the DNA codes for is often quite another matter...)  
  
What is at work here is related to what Richard Feynman called "cargo cult
science": basking in the authoritative glow of the successful simple hard
sciences like physics, and inappropriate conceding of such authority by many
in the public. Most of reality is too complex for science to be nearly as
successful as they have been at tackling physics. The respect and authority we
grant to scientists studying simple (low Kolmogorov complexity) phenomena
should not be extended to scientists studying more complex areas and having
poor track records of successful prediction.

