Several readers have expressed interest in learning some law. I highly
encourage this. Knowledge of legal basics is not only of great practical use
in modern society, it is essential for understanding politics and history,
regardless of whether you have any interest in becoming a lawyer. I will thus
be making a number of posts over the next few months discussing a variety of
basic legal concepts. These may include subject matter jurisdiction, personal
jurisdiction, the tort of trespass, contract formation, and a variety of other
basic legal ideas. Today I write about the crucial distinction between
procedural and substantive law.  
  
Procedural law is about how the law gets passed and enforced: who has
jurisdiction over whom, and what coercive processes they may use to bring
suspected lawbreakers to justice. The famous Miranda lines "you have the right
to remain silent...." generally uttered in the U.S. when you are arrested are
a species of U.S. federal procedural law. Procedure usually starts in a given
case with a great deal of uncertainty and tries to reduce that uncertainty by
fairly gathering and evaluating evidence, interpreting the law, and applying
those facts to the law to reach legal conclusions.  
  
Substantive law involves every law that is not procedural: it is what we
normally discuss when talking about law or politics, namely the laws defining
and restricting rights and duties for their own sake, not primarily for the
sake of enforcing other laws.  
  
Thus for example modern property, contract, tort, family, and criminal law are
substantive legal areas, as are environmental, workplace, traffic, and most
other regulations. On the other hand, the laws defining who may sue whom and
where, and what does and does not constitute proper arrest, interrogation, and
search of criminal suspects, are procedural laws. Historically, just to
confuse things a bit, property rights sometimes included rights of coercive
procedure, for example the lord who had jurisdiction over his unfree tenants.
This made property law in some cases part of the procedural law as well as a
substantive law of economic property.  
  
Computer protocols work in layers: wires carry bits of information, and bits
of information carry text, pictures, and so on. The raw bits of information
are a lower level protocol that carries the text and pictures in a higher
level protocol. Language works like this too: at the lowest level, paper has
letters written on it. Letters are a lower-level protocol that carries words
in a higher level protocol. You can think of the distinction between
substantive and procedural law in the same way: the procedural layer is a
lower layer that "carries" the substantive law by specifying how it is to be
enforced.  
  
We can also think of government and government-like entities as lower levels
of the legal protocol. Indeed, it is very useful to study political structures
alongside procedural law. Think of coercive entities like police and courts as
the paper and pencil, procedural law as the letters, and substantive law as
the words and sentences we want to make out of these raw materials.

