A paradox is usually just a good _reductio ad absurdum_ , or what
mathematicians call a proof by contradiction. The paradox serves to disprove
one of its assumptions (or equivalently, if we "exclude the middle", to prove
the opposite of one of its assumptions). Many intellectuals often overly
complicate paradoxes, for the sake of entertainment or out of wishful thinking
that the dubious assumption has not in fact been disproven. A paradox is only
truly mysterious if more than one of the assumptions being used are truly
mysterious, and thus we can't tell which assumption caused the contradiction.
But usually it's more a case of obsfucation or wishful thinking than of
genuine mystery. Many academics have a terrible habit of hiding or confusing
their assumptions, and this allows wishful thinking to run rampant.  
  
 **Newcomb's paradox**  
  
Chooser -- let's say that's you --- plays a game wherein you choose whether to
open both boxes A and B or just B. For whatever odd reason -- Predictor is an
omniscient diety, Predictor is running a very repeatable simulation of the
Chooser's mind, time travel, the Predictor has repeatedly run the Chooser
through this experiment before, etc. -- the Predictor already knows with very
high probability what box(es) the Chooser will select. The first step in the
game is that the Predictor makes his prediction. Then a trustworthy third
party puts $1,000 into box A, and $1,000,000 into box B if the Predictor has
predicted B only, otherwise nothing into box B. After these two steps are
completed the Chooser selects which box(es) to open.  
  
Here's the payoff matrix for Chooser:  
  
 _Predicted choice_|  _Actual choice_|  _Payoff_  
---|---|---  
A and B| A and B| $1,000  
A and B| B only| $0  
B only| A and B| $1,001,000  
B only| B only| $1,000,000  
  
  
What is Chooser's best strategy? According to game theory, A and B beats
B-only by $1,000 whether the Predictor predicts A and B or just B. Therefore
Chooser should choose to open both A and B.  
  
But another strategy for Chooser is the following: The Chooser, knowing that
the Predictor has very good information about his forthcoming choice and has
mechanically acted on it, and thus is almost surely correct, eliminates those
choices where the Predictor is wrong and chooses B-only over A and B because
of the remaining two choices it has a higher payoff.  
  
By following 2-player game theory, the expected value of Chooser's winnings is
only a bit over $1,000, while by taking into account the high accuracy of the
Predictor's prediction and maximizing expected value the expected value is a
bit over $1,000,000.  
  
The paradox dissappears if you stop assuming a game with two players. The
Predictor does not have any stake in the outcome and is not a player. Indeed,
we are told that Predictor will make no free choice at all, but will simply
mechanically predict what Chooser will do. It's the Chooser's free will in the
face of a mechanical but oddly well-informed Predictor. Chooser should not be
misled by the payoff matrix into assuming this is a 2-player game, but should
instead choose the best of the two choices of significant probability.  
  
 **Fermi's Paradox**  
  
Enrico Fermi asked, if there are extraterrestrial civilizations, why haven't
we seen them? No alien artifacts large or small on earth, nor anything visibly
unnatural on the many millions of square kilometers of billion-year-old (or
more) surface we've observed elsewhere in our solar system, nor any visible
megastructures in our galaxy. Under Darwinian evolution life and civilization
tends to spread to use as much energy and matter as it can. New volcanic
islands and areas where life has been destroyed by volcanoes are quickly
colonized by a very observable spread of plants that soon soak up a
significant fraction of the incoming sunlight. Human civilizations have
similarly in the blink of astronomical time spread all over our planet,
leaving a number of highly visible artifacts such as the Great Wall of China,
a dazzling display of lights on the night side of our planet, and in our
atmosphere increased carbon dioxide and a potpouri of odd chemicals.
Photosynthetic life has given our planet a bizarre oxygen atmosphere and
turned our continents significantly darker. Even if an alien society somehow
turned radically un-Darwinian and thus remained obsessively small and hidden,
it would take just one "crazy hermit" to appear once in hundreds of millions
of years to take off and replicate his crazy Darwinian verion of that
civilization across the galaxy, building visible structures all over the
galaxy to efficiently use stellar energy and recycle volatile elements.  
  
The average star in our galaxy is about 10 billion years old; if it takes 5
billion years for life to appear and evolve into a civilization and 200
million years for the their descendants to spread across our galaxy (which
only requires travel at a small fraction of the speed of light), the average
civilization that has already emerged in our galaxy should have spread across
it 2.3 billion years ago.  
  
If they exist, or existed, evidence of this existence should be all over the
galaxy, just as with the existence of life and civilization on earth. But we
see no evidence that any advanced civilization has ever expanded into our
solar system or any where else in our galaxy. Even worse, we see no evidence
of artificiality in other galaxies. Artificial entities would severely change
what we observe in the cosmos, but instead the millions of galaxies we've
observed seem to look quite natural. This can be easily tested by studying
data from our current telescopes. Unless we discover a significant proportion
of galaxies that are oddly dim in the optical but bright in the infrared (or
perhaps, if the alien machines are extremely clever and very miserly, in the
microwave), indicating artificially efficient use of stellar energy, and oddly
bright in the heavy element spectra and dim in the volatile elements spectra,
indicating artifically efficient enclosure of the volatile elements (for
efficient volatile recycling), we must conclude that the odds of finding a
civilization in any given galaxy, and thus of another civilization in our own
galaxy, are remote. Fermi's paradox simply proves its major assumption wrong:
there are no little green men in our galaxy. Sorry to pop that good old sense
of wonder.  
  
It would be fun to listen in on a civilization from a distant galaxy, if we
ever find one and if we ever figure out how to detect such faint signals.
Imagine the Wikipedia of a billion-year-old civilization!  
  
 **Kavka's toxin**  
  
Perhaps less easily resolved, because one of its assumptions is the vague and
subjective idea of "intent", is the paradox of Gregory Kavka's toxin: you get
$1 million put in your bank account at 9 AM if at 7 AM you intend to drink an
extremely painful but not otherwise harmful toxin at 11 AM. The toxin
basically causes you to live in sheer hell for 24 hours. You get to keep the
million dollars whether you drink the toxin or not. Can you intend to do
something that when the time comes would not be rational to do? Kavka says you
can't -- that there is no way to win the $1 million. Turn off your alarm and
sleep in.  
  
My analysis is that the only ways to win the $1 million are through credible
commitment or self-delusion. Thus the Wikipedia entry cites election-year
political promises that would actually be too expensive to implement as an
example of Kavka's toxin. Of course the political party only fools others (and
perhaps themselves) into believing its intent. Standard election procedures,
in which campaign promises are not legally binding, prevent credible
commitment, so serious intent only could arise through self-delusion.

