"The blogosphere has developed a set of copyright norms in an area where there
is very little enforcement. These norms about the use of copyrighted material
are probably at odds with existing copyright law." So writes Daniel Solove, a
professor at my law school, More here (via Emergent Chaos). The same was true
of the original Internet itself (e-mail, ftp, and so on), and then of the web.
There would be no useful Internet and no useful web if it the copyright that
copyright law says exists in almost every human-generated packet of bits was
actually tracked and enforced. Copyright exists by default, simply from the
human act of creating a web page, a photo, some music, and so on. Generally,
under current copyright law once a work is created it may not be copied
without the express permission of the copyright owner. However, if this
standard were actually applied to the Internet transaction costs would be
prohibitive and the Internet would not usefully exist.  
  
Fortunately, at least some of the massive copying done by the Internet has
been deemed to come under "implied consent." By sending e-mail or publishing
your web page, you have given implied consent for intermediating servers and
users to have their software make copies so that users can view your work.
Unless you put up a "robots.txt" file that forbids it, presumably Google and
other search engines are free to copy, search, and cache your web pages,
without asking you despite your copyright in them. Contrary to standard
copyright law, web searching like many other features of the Internet does not
require the express permission of the copyright owner. To be protected against
copying the author must give notice that he desires such protection, rather
than the starting with the presumption that nothing can be copied. This
results in radically lower transaction costs that make e-mail, the web, and
web searching possible. But when an industry fights back (e.g. the music
industry against P2P) the presumptions made by emerging Internet norms can be
put in jeopardy, Solove points out.  
  
The idea that copyright exists by default in a work is a rather recent one,
especially in the United States. Traditionally, unless one registered the work
with a copyright office, or at least labeled the work as "copyright", it was
presumed that the work was placed, like almost all human communication has
traditionally been placed, in the public domain. Copyright offices are now
online and works mostly digital, so that registration can be made far easier.
It's often easy to give notice to software regarding the status of works as
with the "robots.txt" system. Under Internet norms works such as e-mails, web
pages, and blog posts are not protected against copying by default. Thus, this
older version of copyright law, where works are not copyrighted until they are
registered or at least labeled as such (this time in a computer-readable way)
is what we should return to in the Internet era, legally as well as de facto.

