Louren√ßo, great questions.  
  
1\. During the Bretton Woods era the Federal Reserve was run largely by
Keynesian and similar economists who stimulated small (c. 3%/year) amounts of
inflation, believing that was the optimal level for economic growth. This
however, isn't compatible with pegging the dollar to gold, which in the long
run would produce much closer to zero inflation, which they believed (and most
economists still believe) would retard economic growth. This is another big
reason U.S. gold reserves fell to financially unsustainable levels by 1968.
The Federal Reserve was finally forced to choose between keeping the gold
standard and keeping to their beliefs that some inflation is good, and they
chose their beliefs (with however unintended consequences described above).  
  
2\. Here as elsewhere diversification across many commodities reduces risks
compared to holding just one commodity. Also, you are sitting on a large
reservoir of oil, you have no choice but between holding and pumping the oil
to sell it for fiat -- which choice will in part be governed by inflation
expectations. Similarly, if you are a country planning for a geopolitically
secure economic growth, you choose between stockpiling and consuming your
stockpiles, in part based on inflation expectations. Finally, if a bubble for
a geopolitical commodity collapses you still have underlying long-term
industrial demand to fall back on, which isn't the case if gold or silver
collapses. So there's a good argument when hedging e.g. your fiat-denominated
government bonds to use a mix of both precious metals and industrial
commodities rather than just precious metals alone.

