Here's a relevant comment I just made on another blog:  
  
BTW, the current Russia/Georgia conflict is a good illustration of the dual
influence of monetary and fundamental factors on oil prices, and how the
monetary factors can outweigh even the most important and surprising
fundamental factors. Many commentators seem puzzled that the dollar price of
oil is dropping while Russia threatens vital oil and gas pipelines in Georgia.
The conundrum is resolved by observing that since the invasion the price of
oil in gold has in fact increased significantly. The drop in dollars per
barrel of oil has been accompanied by an even greater percentage drop in
dollars per ounce of gold.  
  
Even though the Russia/Georgia conflict is a very important and surprising
fundamental factor, and thus should and has had a significant upward effect on
oil prices, it is outweighed in the dollar price of oil by changes in the
dollar. Quite likely this was primarily due to a decrease in long-term
inflation expectations for the dollar which led to an exponentially larger
decrease in the dollar prices of gold and oil.  
  
In this case, it happens that most of the changing expectations for the dollar
did not also occur for the euro, and thus the dollar also strengthened against
the euro as well as against gold and oil, but this is not always (and probably
not even usually) the case -- monetary dominance of oil prices does not imply
substantial correlations between dollar oil prices and the euro/dollar
exchange rate, because many monetary factors influence both the dollar and the
euro, which can both inflate or deflate together. But on occasion the change
in expectations is largely unique to the Fed or to the ECB and in these cases
one can see exchange rates of other currencies for the dollar or thhe euro
move along with the dollar or euro prices of oil and gold, as we have seen so
far this week.

