Accountability, I'm afraid that if I could pop up dossiers of people I pass on
the street, the first kind of people I would avoid would be those who have
expressed a taste for cannibalism. But forgetting that and assuming despite
the evidence that your comments could be serious, here goes:  
  
 _1\. What is the argument against rule of law?_  
  
Those of a group of legal scholars who call themselves legal realists. Most of
the creativity, some for good but more for ill, of 20th century high court
holdings can be attributed to them.  
  
 _2\. What do you think of the idea of an Accountable Society, where
everything an individual does is recorded and documented?_  
  
It very much depends on who is doing the surveillance and how the surveillors
themselves are made accountable. The current system of government officials
themselves laying hidden and peeping at us through robot cameras is very
creepy, like having strangers in every park staring at us from behind bushes.
A society of the kind David Brin has advocated, where everybody spies on each
other, is far more tenable. But either kind of surveillance could lead to
legal totalitarianism, i.e. the law dictating everything we do in both our
public and (formerly) private life, stripping us of private lives, so I am
also greatly in favor of privacy technology such as encryption. And using
pseudonyms so that you can safely declare your preference for the flesh of
illogical humans.  
  
 _Have you met my neighbour? Total goof, man: hideously dishonest, hostile,
rude, ugh, I can't stand him._  
  
I recommend that if you don't like your neighbors, and you don't have a
nuisance or other common law claim, move. Pretty simple really. Freedom of
travel and freedom of association are two of our most important unenumerated
constitutional rights (ah, the blog name!) and we should exercise them more
often.

