 _Why should I pay higher prices for corn products just so retirees can have
more certain retirement funds? I want the price of corn set so that the
appropriate amount of corn is produced and consumed!_  
  
Roughly speaking, the appropriate amount, taking into account the benefits
that accrue from mitigating the problems being caused by the dollar, is being
produced and consumed. It's just that some of the benefit is going to
protecting retirement, college, and other investment accounts against the
ravages of the falling dollar, and into stocking third world larders as a
hedge against inflation and resulting future inability to purchase enough food
with dollars or dollar-linked currencies, and some commodities consumption is
being deferred from this year to future years, rather than the entire benefit
going to today's consumers, as occurs when the dollar is healthy.  
  
 _So can you please explain to me how using commodities futures as an
inflation hedge (or new currency) does not cause a negative impact (market
distortion) on the actual market for the commodity?_  
  
It does cause negative impact and distortion in traditional Econ 101 terms
(i.e. just looking at supply and demand for the commodity but not also for the
dollar), though most of it is temporary: in the long run there will be
sufficient stockpiles and institutional adjustments to support the use of
commodities as a currency, probably without a substantial monetary premium on
any given commodity, since there are so many commodities and much room for
"fractional reserve" (i.e. having many more futures or other derivatives
outstanding than commodities that actually are expected to be delivered at
expiry -- we are currently going through a transition to this state, figuring
out how to seamlessly "roll over" most futures).  
  
If the commodities currencies still strike you as worse than the dollar,
either because of the temporary problems we are experiencing now or because
even in the long run there will be some (I suspect small) price premium due to
the monetary value of commodities as currencies, the way to fix the problem is
not to attack the symptoms (commodities currencies), but to attack root cause
that gives rise to the need for commodity currencies (the poor management of
the dollar). Attacking commodities "speculation" is like attacking the immune
system, because the immune system proximately causes a fever, instead of
attacking the disease that ultimately causes the fever. Attacking the immune
system when you have a disease can kill you.

