

### Introduction

This is the first of at least two posts on the evolution of collectibles and
money.  The goal is to explore the evolutionary and economic functions of the
“ornamental” or “ceremonial” objects that are so common in the archaeological
record. In this article, we will look broadly and visually at the patterns of
evolution of artifacts, in terms of their material and visual characteristics,
of the most common kinds of collectibles -- those objects that look to our
modern eyes like jewelry.



---



_‘Tomb Nr 7 from Yao Shan showing Jade implements and their position on or
near the body. This display in the Museum gives a good overview of the
multiple Jade pieces and shapes following the deceased Liangzhu Noble into to
afterworld.' (Neolithic China, 3000 BC to 2000 BCE)_



This blog post will lay out a profound puzzle: the ubiquity and importance of
artifacts, often called “ornamental”, “decorative”, “ceremonial”, or “ritual”,
the evolutionary function of which the anthropological and archaeological
literature has never successfully explained. We will study the common
instances, and the kinds of artifacts of most general importance across human
cultures and timespans, and the connections between them, rather than
thrilling to the rare and freakish artistry beloved of collectors, museums,
and ethnographers.



---


_Sungir (in the Russian plain, c. 200 km east of Moscow): burial with mammoth
ivory bracelets and thousands of mammoth ivory beads, 25000-17000 BC.    This
is long before the Neolithic (early agriculture era; the people represented in
these burials were mammoth hunters.
http://archaeology.about.com/od/sterms/g/sungir.htm.  Randall White estimates
that an individual bead took one to two hours of work, and as a result that
the grave goods in such a burial represented nearly 10,000 hours of labor. [7]
“_ _Each of the three intact individuals was lavishly decorated with thousands
of painstakingly prepared ivory beads arranged in dozens of strands... The man
was adorned with 2,936 beads…”http://www.donsmaps.com/sungaea.html_




To describe my solution to these puzzles, in future posts I will elucidate
updated versions of the theories laid out on the evolutionary functions of
these objects[1]. These theories are not about how people in these cultures
perceived or thought about their axes and shells and their uses, much less
about the interpretations and explanations given in the accounts of travelers
and missionaries, and in the ethnographic literature. These varied widely,
both in how the natives themselves interpreted their thoughts and actions and
how the various observers who recorded these thoughts and actions further
interpreted them. Understanding the thoughts and feelings of people in such an
alien culture is usually extremely difficult at best. Trying to get in the
heads of people from long-extinct cultures is a futile exercise. Our account
will rather be about the evolutionary function of these objects and their
uses, which was typically unconscious, but which we can infer from
archaeological facts, objective aspects of ethnographic observations, and
general evolutionary and economic principles appropriately adapted.  We talk
in short in terms of _ultimate_ rather than _proximate_ explanations [14]:
what were the consequences in terms of Darwinian fitness for the non-concrete
uses of collectibles?

###  **Artifacts as Wealth**

 ****There were a wide variety of objects that at one time or another could
have served as to a greater or lesser extent as stores and displays of wealth,
and to a greater or lesser extent media for the satisfaction of obligations
and units of account. (I will describe what I mean by “media of obligation
satisfaction” in future posts; for now it is sufficient to say that it is a
generalization of the economic idea of “medium of exchange” to include a wide
variety of non-exchange transactions that transfer wealth).



The manufacture and use of shell beads is more than 100,000 years old, and
possibly dates to the earliest millennia of _homo sapiens. ** **_ The use of
“ritual” blades and points may be even older, predating our species. The
general pattern of artifacts in general and collectibles in particular in
terms of their abilities to store, display, or transfer wealth can be
diagrammed as follows:



 At the extreme upper left-hand corner is modern money – used purely as a
medium of exchange and obligation satisfaction, and with high velocity,
typically several transactions per month.  The predominant such media in a
culture also usually becomes its of account. At the opposite (southeast)
extreme are pure stores of value – seldom if ever alienated, they usually
change ownership only at death.  At the northeast extreme are pure
collectibles – a low-velocity (a few to a few dozen transfers per human
lifetime) medium of obligation satisfaction and exchange, but also a store and
display of wealth.  At the southwest extremely are immediate consumables, such
as food obtained from foraging in cultures that do not preserve or store their
food.



“Media for the satisfaction of obligations” is a generalization of the idea
from modern monetary theory that money serves as a media of exchange. The
kinds of obligations that might be satisfied over the course of human
evolution are far broader and deeper than just exchange, which was probably
far from the most important kind of wealth transfer during the Paleolithic.
“Unit of account” is any measure or count that people in a society used as a
general (across multiples goods and services) proxy measure of value.



As for display of wealth, according to the theory of this series this was the
main function of ornamentation, and is derivative from the function of these
objects as stores of wealth. In a future post we will discuss more about what
is meant by this terminology.



The correlations between media for the satisfaction of obligations and units
of account, and between stores and displays of wealth, largely holds true for
Paleolithic and Neolithic times when functions were condensed that are now
quite distinct . In more recent times there has been a strong divergence
between stores of wealth and displays of wealth (e.g. stocks and bonds vs.
jewelry).



Most of the durable artifacts that archaeologists dig up from the Paleolithic
through Bronze Ages, including the early civilizations of Mesopotamia, lived a
mixed life – they were concretely useful objects **and** low-velocity media of
fitness-benefiting transactions **and** stores and displays of wealth, to
varying degrees, but seldom if ever used as just any one of these. They
_condensed_ multiple functions that we now consider separate and often
unrelated, as discussed further below.



It is important to keep in mind two very large selection biases at work in
archaeology.  The first is that apart from some exceptional environments (e.g.
peat bogs) that preserve organic material, only durable objects survive to be
dug up by the archaeologist.  This means that an artifact is more likely to be
a collectible than the typical artifact in the culture (which quite
preponderantly would have been organic materials for concrete use that have
not survived). The second selection bias is that nearly all collectors and
museums, and most archaeologists, are heavily biased towards collecting
objects that more resemble unique artworks than they are interested in
collecting or studying repetitive and boring objects.  Overcoming this bias
can result in substantial breakthroughs in understanding a culture. For
example Denise Schmidt-Besserant discovered the origins of writing in
Mesopotamia by focusing on repetitive and unartful clay tokens that had been
ignored by collectors and ther archaeologists.



In addition to the two general selection effects above, another selection
effect particularly impacts metals.  That is that metals, especially precious
metals but even baser metals such as copper and bronze, were recycled very
efficiently. Metallic artifacts we find in archaeological digs are likely to
be particularly unrepresentative of the metallic artifacts most commonly used
in a society.  For money in particular, unless they were unique artworks of
particular attraction to collectors, an earlier form of metallic money has
with very high probability been recycled into a later form of metallic money,
or into some other metal object, the result being that the earlier forms are
highly underrepresented in the archaeological record.





---
                                                _From the Gutenberg 42-line Bible_ [source].



**Some Basic Patterns of Collectibles**



Three of the most important patterns of collectibles that have been discovered
in this research are _condensation, authority resemblance,_ and _unforgeable
costliness._ In the former two cases these patterns are broadly applicable to
artifacts in general. Taking these in turn:



 _1\. Condensation --_ generally speaking, __ the farther back we go in time,
the lesser the degree of specialization (division of labor) and thus
differentiation of technology exists. Furthermore, the weight and bulk of
artifacts per family was much lower in Neolithic society, with its much higher
transport costs, than today. In Paleolithic forager societies, which were
typically mobile, belongings had to be carried on the person, resulting in a
still radically lower weight or volume of goods controlled by a person or
clan. This results as we go back in time in _condensation:_ a given object
tends to serve a greater variety of functions: it _condenses_ the functions we
consider or take for granted today as separate and often unrelated functions.



Obtaining fitness benefits by the widest variety of available means within a
society with a radically smaller division of labor and differentiation of
technology. Thus institutions usually condensed the functions of religion with
business, business with politics and war, law with lore, tort law with
criminal law, ceremony with accounting, and gang warfare with a substantial
body of customary rules. Objects could condense the functions of jewelry with
coinage, and concrete utility with media of obligation satisfaction and store
of value.



From our point of view functions in earlier periods are increasingly
condensed, and in Neolithic times were very highly condensed, and in
Paleolithic times were radically condensed: a typical object tended to serve
many more purposes in the early Paleolithic than in the late Paleolithic, less
still in the Neolithic, and less still after the dawn of state-like
agricultural societies. Contrariwise the general trend of economic development
over millennia, and between stages of the Paleolithic and Neolithic, is
_differentiation. **  **_ Missionaries, travellers, and ethnographic
observers, as well as their readers, often committed the _fallacy of exclusion
**–**_ concluding that because an object was used for one thing, that it was
not used for another thing in what we consider to be a separate sphere of
activity.




---

_Detail from the_ Giant Bible of Mainz _, handwritten in the traditional way
around the same time as Gutenberg produced the first printed Bible._ [source]



_2\. Authority resemblance_ – Initial forms of innovative artifacts, of a kind
the value of which was based at least in part on their authority, often
borrowed authority from what they were replacing by physical resemblance.
Mimicry of or semblance to pre-existing authoritative forms in a new medium
was and is a very common feature of innovations: examples range from
Gutenberg’s printing press mimicking scribal script to the private overnight
parcel service Federal Express alluding by name and color scheme to the United
States Postal Service.  The ritualistic airstrips, offices, military drills,
etc. of _cargo cults_ were an extreme example of authority resemblance, and it
predominates in the design of   national flags and many other symbols (such as
commercial brands) that invoke reputation or authority. Where not tabooed or
banned as counterfeiting or trademark violation, authority resemblance was and
is a common feature of innovative collectibles, their form invoking a
traditional authoratative form while pioneering a new media.



The histories of art and architecture in religion, politics, finance, and
business are replete with examples of authority resemblance.  The designs of
many of the very earliest coins, which differ greatly from the standard and
presumably optimal form they soon converged on and have retained ever since,
highlights what existing objects they were inspired by and suggests a
similarity in intended role and function between the novel object and the old
object whose form it has taken on. We will see in this and future posts that
the earliest coins borrowed their form from shells, beads, and the metal
blades of tools.




---


_Detail of necklace from a burial at Sungir, Russia, 28,000 BP. Interlocking
and interchangeable beads. Each mammoth ivory bead may have required one to
two hours of labor to manufacture. [9]_



3\. _Unforgeable costliness –_ a wide variety of objects, which we call
_collectibles,_ have as a necessary component and a secure costliness – either
in search costs of collection, in manufacturing costs, or both – that serves
to constraint its supply curve.  This is true for collectibles as media of
obligation satisfaction as well as collectibles as stores and displays of
wealth.




---

_Efficient symbolic communication – Mesolithic cave painting -- abundant
surface and easily made pigments. Much information._ [Source]



Many of the artifacts called here collectibles, especially Paleolithic and
Neolithic beads, have been assumed by archaeologists to be primarily
“ornamental” and serve a “symbolic” function, i.e. are said to have been
“information technology”[6]. If an artifact were purely symbolic (e.g. a clay
tablet impressed with accounting records) we would expect symbol efficiency to
be high given the available materials (e.g. clay) and technologies (e.g.
symbols for words). But with collectibles, people went out of their way to
choose costly goods and undertake costly methods of manufacture – collectibles
such as beads typically had an extremely poor symbol efficiency compared to
the available alternatives.  They must have had functions that were much more
than symbolic, leading to competing requirements that we must elucidate.



---

_Efficient symbolic communication – already existing and otherwise useful
flint painted with symbols (c. 5000 BC)_ [Source]



As we will see below, beads of shell, bone, and similar objects were made,
strung, and worn for tens of millennia in the vast majority of Upper
Paleolithic and Neolithic cultures.  Gratuitous use of costly beads over tens
of millennia would have been weeded out by Darwinian genetic selection. Beads,
used as actually observed either in Epipaleolithic or Neolithic burials or as
observed in the few recently observed such cultures, are not, in contrast to
spoken human language and every other information-rich symbolic system, used
in any way remotely approaching the efficient coding scheme that would have
emerged from natural selection if pure symbolism were their main evolutionary
function.  Beads that are arranged in a pleasing regular pattern, as they
typically are, carry very little information – they are extremely inefficient
in terms of information per unit of weight or volume and especially per cost
of collection and manufacture. Since forager bands were typically mobile they
had even more compelling evolutionary pressure to improve the symbol
efficiency of their media, by evolving choices and designs for the most
efficient available such media, if such recorded communication was an
evolutionary important (and evolutionarily accessible) problem. Instead, vocal
communications were far more useful for mobile forager bands and underwent the
radical and unique evolution of human spoken language, while remains of
recorded symbolic communications are sparse and rare.





---

_Efficient communication – painted pebbles (Norwegian Mesolithic, c. 11,000
BP)_

 ** **

Not only were beads of multiple varieties almost always strung together in
regular patterns that did not take advantage of the coding capabilities of the
multiple varieties, but the most common bead pattern was repeating the same
kind of bead over and over again, which carries no information whatsoever in
the arrangement of the beads. The digital nature of shell beads makes this a
tempting theory in our society so saturated by computer screens and codes, but
it is wrong.




---

_Cost-effective communication – pictures, pictograms and counting symbols in
abundant clay (Transylvania, 5500-5300 BC)_





What would have efficient symbolic coding of bead patterns look like if
contrary to the observed facts it had evolved? If there are, for example, 16
different roles (what we would call “offices”) in a clan (elder, shaman,
etc.), and there is evolutionary benefit (e.g. in minimizing disputes) to
representing title to those positions in permanent form, one does not need a
long string of beads.  A clan only needs 16 different objects, each
representing a different office.  If the clan has only 2 different kinds of
objects available, they still only 4 of them (2^4 = 16 bits of information).
There are a wide variety of coding schemes in between that would be this
efficient or nearly so.  But no such efficient scheme, or any scheme anywhere
nearly as efficient as such a scheme, using beads has ever been observed in
widespread use in a Paleolithic or Neolithic culture: neither in
contemporarily observed instances of such cultures nor in the archaeological
record.



---

_Wasteful as symbolic communication – regular pattern (little information) and
made of costly beads, as well as taking much additional labor to assemble from
the beads.   Wampum, Museum of Ontario Archaeology._ [Source]




If Paleolithic and Neolithic beads had been as extremely cheap as mass-
manufactured beads are today, and transportation and storage costs had been
those of today, the extremely poor symbolic efficiency of how beads were used
might be taken to not have mattered so much.  But beads were very costly to
make and in a mobile forager society were costly to bring with. An example of
how beads were far too costly for purely symbolic communications is provided
by the cost analysis done on beads found in the Sungir Burials of the
29,000-15,000 BP epoch. Randall White estimates that an individual bead took
one to two hours of work, and as a result that the grave goods in such a
burial represented nearly 10,000 hours of labor. [7]



---


_QR codes are a great way for computers to read a label printed by another
computer and affixed to a movable object, but a terrible technique for human-
to-human communications, especially if as with shell beads each “pixel” had
cost an hour or more of human labor to make._



So while beads could have been and sometimes were used for symbolic purposes,
this could not have been their primary evolutionary function – symbolic
aspects of their use would have been very secondary. A similar analysis
applies to most other kinds of collectibles, such as “ceremonial” blades and
points (most commonly axes). Unforgeable costliness – the secure supply curve
of these objects relative to the much more common objects in the environment
that were not used as collectibles – strongly suggests that these collectibles
had some function very important to Darwinian fitness related to wealth. What
that function was has been explored in [1] which I hope to elaborate on in
future post(s).




---

_Regular pattern of costly beads. Wampum, British Museum. _ [Source]



In some broad sense of the term any display of wealth is “symbolic”,
especially when its design invokes the reputation or authority of prior
displays of wealth. Thus the commonality of authority resemblance in the
design of paper money, coins, and jewelry, repeated tropes such as gold foil
and expensive ultramarine blue pigments in medieval and Renaissance European
art, etc. But it is the ability of the medium to serve as a secure store and
display of wealth that is doing the heavy lifting here, not its ability to
efficiently convey information.



When costliness becomes insecure, and authority resemblance comes to
predominate over genuine scarcity, we can get counterfeiting crises that
disrupt the culture relying on the old form of collectible.  The first
craftsmen to pound copper and gold flat and apply it to surfaces could make
far more surface look lavish than was possible with solid copper or gold. Such
a counterfeiting crisis would have produced a kind of inflation broader than
monetary inflation: a change in expectations about wealth securely displayed
as well as wealth securely stored in an object. To the extent imitation cowrie
shells (see below) could be made out of materials much cheaper than the
genuine cowrie (e.g. stone) it could produce such inflation. Trade beads were
colonial examples: mass-produced beads that were supernormal models of shell
beads shiny from wear, usurping their authority, while being cheaply mass
produced, undermining the previously unforgeable costliness of beads.





**Attributes of Collectibles**



What attributes are we looking for in media of obligation satisfaction, units
of account, and in stores and displays of wealth? "Shelling Out: The Origins
of Money" argued, and future posts will argue, that



[C]ollectibles provided a fundamental improvement to the workings of
reciprocal altruism, allowing humans to cooperate in ways unavailable to other
species. For them, reciprocal altruism is severely limited by unreliable
memory. Some other species have large brains, build their own homes, or make
and use tools. No other species has produced such an improvement to the
workings of reciprocal altruism.



[Economist Karl] Menger called this first money an "intermediate commodity" --
what this paper calls collectibles. An artifact useful for other things, such
as cutting, could also be used as a collectible. However, once institutions
involving wealth transfer became valuable, collectibles would be manufactured
just for their collectible properties. What are these properties? For a
particular commodity to be chosen as a valuable collectible, it would have
had, relative to products less valuable as collectibles, at least the
following desirable qualities:



(1)    More secure from accidental loss and theft.  For most of history this
meant it could be carried on the person and easy to hide.



(2)    Harder to forge its value.  An important subset of these are products
that are unforgeably costly, and therefore considered valuable…



(3)    This value was more accurately approximated by simple observations or
measurements. These observations would have had more reliable integrity yet
have been less expensive.



Humans across the world are strongly motivated to collect items that better
satisfy these properties. Some of this motivation probably includes
genetically evolved instincts. Such objects are collected for the sheer
pleasure of collecting them (not for any particularly good explicit and
proximate reasons), and such pleasure is nearly universal across human
cultures. One of the immediate proximate motivations is decoration. According
to Dr. Mary C. Stiner, an archaeologist at the University of Arizona,
"Ornamentation is universal among all modern human foragers." [W02] For an
evolutionary psychologist, such a behavior that has a good ultimate
explanation, in terms of natural selection, but has no proximate rationale
other than pleasure, is a prime candidate to be a genetically evolved pleasure
that motivates the behavior. Such is, if the reasoning in this essay is
correct, the human instinct to collect rare items, art, and especially
jewelry.




---

_“Miniature Bi disc”, jade, from the late Neolithic to Bronze Ages, c.
3000-2000 BCE, diameter 1.25" to 2”_ [Source]





The kind of mobile art made by Paleolithic humans, (small figurines and the
like) also matches these characteristics well. Indeed, Paleolithic peoples
made very few objects that were not either utilitarian, or shared
characteristics (1)-(3). There are many puzzling instances of useless or at
least unused flints with _homo sapiens_ …Cunliffe [C94] discusses a European
Mesolithic era find of hundreds of flints, carefully crafted, but which
micrograph analysis reveals were never used for cutting.



Flints were quite likely the first collectibles, preceding special-purpose
collectibles like jewelry. Indeed, the first flint collectibles would have
been made for their cutting utility. Their added value as a medium of wealth
transfer was a fortuitous side effect that enabled the institutions described
in this article to blossom. These institutions, in turn, would have motivated
the manufacture of special-purpose collectibles, at first flints that need
have no actual use as cutting tools, then the wide variety of other kinds of
collectibles that were developed by _homo sapiens_.



It is no coincidence that the attributes of collectibles are shared with
precious metals, coins, and the reserve commodities that have backed most non-
fiat currencies. Money proper implemented these properties a purer form than
the collectibles used during almost all of human prehistory.




---

_Grave goods from Longshan or Liangzhu cultures (China, 3000 to 2000 BCE)_
[Source]



Due to endemic violence, high transaction costs, and the extremely low
division of labor compared to later economies, there was nothing resembling
modern efficient spot markets in Paleolithic or most Neolithic societies.  As
a result, classical accounts of the origins of money like those of Smith,
Menger, et. al. cannot be used as a theory or guide to the actual historical
origins of money without extremely heavy modification.




---

_Rare and lovingly worked shell collectibles being displayed for transfer at a
bride price ceremony in Papua New Guinea (20 thcentury)_ __[Source]





**The Snail Standard**



Collectibles, even pure collectibles, have an extremely ancient heritage that
must have put them under prolonged evolutionary selection: cultural
(memetic[2]) selection most obviously, but as we shall see, possibly also
genetic selection for a hankering to collect certain kinds of objects for
display and accumulation, not just for food. An evolutionarily gratuitous
practice of such substantial cost would have soon died out, but collectibles
with the traits listed above have been a nearly ubiquitous and important part
of human cultures for many tens of millennia and in all parts of the planet to
which humans have spread.



The Upper Paleolithic period, as the tail end of the most recent Ice Age,
featured climates mostly cooler than today and sea levels that were many tens
of meters lower than they are today.  The vast majority of seaside communities
of that epoch now lie submerged under fathoms of ocean and are usually
prohibitively costly for archaeologists to try to find.




---

_Consistent form:_ Nassarius gibbosulus _shells beads in varied stages of use-
wear, from_ _Üçağızli Cave I in Turkey.   Shell beads generally get shinier
with wear. [6]_



One exception to this submersion is the set of Üçağızli caves along the thin
stretch of Turkish coast that sits in front of Syria. The approach to the
coast there is quite steep. As a result, even though the caves are still above
sea level today, and were thus 60-80 meters above sea level in the Upper
Paleolithic, they lie a short (but steep) walk of probably around 1 kilometer
from that era’s shoreline.



The inhabitants of these caves lived in a climate that was more like that of
today’s Baltic Sea region than of today’s Mediterranean.  They feasted both on
land animals such as deer and on marine resources, a mix that trended from
land resources to a mix of land and marine resources over the period recorded
in the archaeological layers. These people walked the shore not just in search
of food, but also in search of a very specific set of uncommon yet
authoritative objects – shells of the sea snail _Nassarius gibbosulus._ Once
collected they were selected for size and intactness, and laboriously
perforated.  They were then strung onto cords, presumably as necklaces,
bracelets, or belts, or sewn onto clothes, as beads would appear in later
Paleolithic burials.  Extensive cord-wear exists on most of the beads.

---

_Consistent size distributions_ _of_ _Üçağızli_ _Cave I beads by culture
period from 41,000 BP (start of Initial Upper Paleolithic) to 29,000 BP (end
of Epipaleolithic) [6]_


Upper Paleolithic shell bead manufacturers were very selective of which size
and shape of shells they chose to turn into beads: the resulting beads had
“great consistency…of size and shape” compared to the natural biotic
distribution of the shells.  Most variation in shell species, shape, and size
was eliminated during manufacture. They were as similar in size, shape, and
weight as it was possible for a collectable set of natural objects in that
environment to be. According to Stiner et. al.:



Something about the basket-shaped forms in particular – their resemblance to
something else or just their geometry – held the interests of people over very
long stretches of time. It is difficult to argue that continuity in species
and forms across such vast stretches of time and space reflects cultural
affinity or continuity, particularly in the case of beautiful _natural_
objects. While preferred shell forms stayed much the same, other aspects of
culture varied a great deal.[6]




---

_Severe conservatism of shells selected for use as beads at Üçağızli from c.
41,000 BP (layer I) to 29,000 BP (layer EPI) – time goes from bottom to top.
Relative frequencies of Columbella, Nassarius, Dentalium, Gibbula, and other
taxa used as shell beads.  There was during this long period a very strong
preference for the “basket-shaped” shells of the most typical size of
Columbella and Nassarius over the many other and more common shapes and sizes
of shells across the Mediterranean. [6]_

** **
Besides a consistent form, the beads were also manufactured in a supply that
was very stable across the more than ten millennia recorded in the Üçağızli
caves. The diet changed – at the beginning of this timespan consisting almost
entirely of land resources, at the end in a mix of land and marine resources
-- but the shell bead supply remained remarkably steady.



Consider that objects constituting an efficient medium for the satisfaction of
obligations among forager peoples would satisfy two main criteria:

> 1\. They must be common and consistent enough to find or make a sufficient
number of fungible instances to allow divisibility, and
>
> 2\. They must be rare enough or costly enough to make to constitute
substantial wealth with low bulk and weight, and must fit snugly enough
together when strung and worn, that they do not overburden the mobile forgers
who carry them around when changing campsites (as they often did).

These hard-to-find shells of _Nassarius_ and _Columbella_ were the objects in
the Mediterranean forager environments that best satisfied these criteria.
Incorporating as they did unforgeable costliness, they would have also made
splendid stores and displays of wealth.  In any of these roles, they were a
pure collectible. The snail shell standard was far from arbitrary.



---

_Consistent supply: abundance of beads (“ornaments”) vs. vertebrates
(typically edible land animals) and edible shellfish (“shellfish”) found in
the successive_ _Üçağızli layers 41,000-29,000 BP.[6]_



The use of _N. gibbosulus_ shells as beads goes back much further in time than
the 41,000 BP starting point of this study of  Üçağızli. The earliest evidence
of this shell standard is dated from between 100,000 and 135,000 BP at Skuhl
in Israel, and similarly old beads were found in Algeria.  The institution
prevailed for many tens of thousands of years across most of the length of the
Mediterranean[11]. It was not until the Epipaleolithic that there was even the
slightest trace of Schumpeterian “creative destruction” in this institution.



 **
---
**

_“Money Cowry; Length 2.6 cm; Palou Tello, Batu Islands, Indonesia.”_ [Source]





**Cowries**



Cowry shells are among the most widely distributed objects found in Eurasian
Neolithic archaeology[8]. Peng and Zhu [2] use the archaeological record to
trace an early Bronze Age “Cowrie Road” roughly following the arc of the later
Silk Road across the mid-Eurasian steppes from the Red Sea (where the species
used probably lived) to what is now modern China.  The lack of thick forests
or fixed agriculture made the region relatively easy for merchants and other
travellers to traverse.




---

_Finds of cowries originating from the Red Sea (off the map to the left),
during the middle and late Shang Dynasty, c. 1400-1040 BC.  This general West-
to-East movement would be repeated in much later times by a largely ship-borne
movement of silver. [2]_



These cowries have also been found in many Neolithic excavations within a few
hundred kilometers of the Red Sea, including pre-dynastic Egypt and Jericho as
far back as the second Neolithic stage (7000-6000BC). Cowries are also found
in the steppe Djeitun culture (7000-6000 BC). Cowrie shells did not however
reach everywhere, and were far from the only shells used in the Eurasian
Neolithic.  In southeastern China during the late Neolithic and early Bronze
Age, cowries were not used, but instead four species of mollusk from China’s
own coast[2]. In the Mediterranean Neolithic _Spondylus_ shells were often
used [3], but there was also a significant presence of cowrie in Mesopotamia
and the eastern Mediterranean.



---
_Authority resemblance: bronze cowries ( Shang dynasty (商代) 1600-1046 BC)
_[Source]



---
_"Ant-nose” coins ( Eastern Zhou 770 to 221 BC) _[Source]

Cowries are also recorded in historical times as being used as money, for
example in parts of China. The cowrie shell symbol 貝 is used as a component to
write several Chinese words [5] associated with the transfer of value,
including



則 (rule, law, regulation) – a cowrie and a knife – possibly referring to the
two main kinds of legal remedies (money and punishment), which I hope to
explore in depth in future posts



買 (buy, purchase) – a net over a cowrie (cowrie in a pouch?)



Exchange rates between cowries and coins existed in at least India, Bengal,
and Siam.




---

_Obverse and reverse of a Ban Liang coin from the Western Han Dynasty (206 BC
– 204 AD). Like beads, they were strung on strings.   These “strings of cash”
were the most common form of payment in China until colonial times._
__[Source]



Authority resemblance, the mimicry of pre-existing authoritative forms in a
new medium, is as described above a very common feature of innovation. The
earliest electrum coins invented near the Turkish coast appear, like the
Chinese bronze cowries and “ ant-nose” coins (so named by a much later
numismatist), to purposefully resemble pre-existing shell collectibles[13].
This suggests that the earliest coins were intended to be authoritative for
uses similar to what cowries in China and electrum beads in Anatolia,
respectively, were already being used for.




---

_Electrum beads in the form of cowrie shells, from a burial in Middle Kingdom
Egypt. Yet another likely case of authority resemblance._ [Source]


Shininess and other aesthetically desired characteristics could have served as
_proxy measures   _of scarcity during the long periods of the shell standards
in the Upper Paleolithic, and these continue to be attractive attributes of
jewelry to this day.



---
_Electrum and gold beads, Nubia, c. 1700-1550 BC_


**Conclusion**



It was once argued that the eye could not have evolved, for what use is half
an eye, much less a quarter of an eye and so forth?  Richard Dawkins called
this “argument from lack of imagination.”  It is hard to imagine objects much
less functional than those we are familiar with as being useful at all. But
even one light-sensing cell can be useful in telling the difference between
night and day, which in some environments can be strongly correlated with the
availability of food or protection from predators. Starting from that most
rudimentary (yet useful in itself) of functions, there are a wide variety of
useful steps to the sophisticated eyes of animals today. [4] Similarly with
the artifacts of archaeology, sometimes objects far less functional than the
ones we take for granted could have been evolutionarily crucial to humans
dating back at least to the Middle Paleolithic.





---
_Electrum bead, Mesopotamia c. 1000 BC._[Source]


A wide variety of artifacts have served to store, display, and transfer wealth
in a wide variety of ways, ranging from unique artworks and heirlooms as we
now understand them, to money as we now understand it (typically official
government currencies, the modern legal definition of money), to a wide
variety of forms and uses in between, most of which we no longer know about or
have a difficult time understanding.  Where artifacts are present in burials,
they are most commonly these artifacts of wealth – these collectibles --
rather than concretely useful tools. They are also common in the remainder of
the archaeological record dating back many tens of millennia, strongly
suggesting an important evolutionary function.  During Upper Paleolithic times
shell beads were manufactured in standard forms with a tradition so rigid that
these forms existed largely unchanged for many thousands of years.






---
_Electrum bead necklace, Lydia (in what is now Turkey), c. 550-450 BC_


Stocks and bonds, futures and derivatives, the kind of money we are familiar
with (coins, paper money, digital money, etc.), high art, and most other
artifacts of wealth as we understand them did not exist in Paleolithic times,
and even in Neolithic times, when some artifacts more closely approached these
ideals, they were still far less developed and specialized than today.  We are
not talking about the highly evolved forms of collectibles, quite the opposite
– we are talking about the most rudimentary of function, which nevertheless is
quite a bit better than nothing (which is what other animals have when it
comes to collectibles).  I described what such function is here and will be
elaborating these theories and demonstrating them further in future
publications.








---
_Early electrum coins of the “Ionian-A” or Ephesian type, in what is now
Turkey, c. 625-575 BC._ [Source]






---
_Early electrum coins of the “Ionian-A” or Ephesian type, in what is now
Turkey, c. 625-575 BC._ [Source]



Of the wide variety of artifacts that had no concrete use, but which
archaeologists tend to dub “ornamental” or “ceremonial”, most types were
idiosyncratic to particular cultures. But two types were widely spread in time
and space: beads of shell or bone were ubiquitous in Paleolithic and Neolithic
cultures, while “ornamental” blades and points were widely popular in the
Neolithic and possibly much further back in time.



In both cases where coins were invented – along the coast of Turkey and in
parts of China – many early coins resembled shell beads in probable cases of
authority resemblance. Prior to the invention of coinage many metal beads had
also been shaped in forms resembling shell beads. Before the widespread use of
coinage, the artifacts we now see as jewelry likely also often condensed a
function similar to early coinage.




---
_Early electrum coins of the “Ionian-B” or Milesian type. in what is now
Turkey, c. 625-575 BC_ [Source]










---

_Early electrum coins of the “Ionian-B” or Milesian type. in what is now
Turkey, c. 625-575 BC_ [Source]



Beads of shell and bone dominate the artifacts that look to us like ornaments
in the archaeological record from its invention in the early years of _homo
sapiens_ to late Neolithic times, and were still very influential when coins
were invented. Contrary to a currently popular archaeological theory, the main
use of these shell beads was not as “information technology” or the visual
convenience of symbolic information via different combinations of shell beads.
Other materials available in forager environments and other techniques
foragers could use were much better suited to cost-efficient symbolic
communications. Instead what coins and jewelry, at least as far back as the
very conservative shell bead traditions of the Upper Paleolithic, have in
common, in sharp contrast to cost-efficient symbolic systems, is unforgeable
costliness, which securely constrained the supply curve of these goods.   This
economic security feature strongly suggests functions related to wealth and
the fitness benefits of wealth. What these functions more specifically were,
in terms of genetic evolution and certain models from economics applied to
that evolutionary framework, will be the subject of subsequent post(s) in this
series.





**Acknowledgements**



My thanks to Colin Hardwick and Elaine Ou, among others, for their help with
research and/or editing.
