Brian, keeping a ledger of who owns what financial instrument (e.g. a share of
stock or a particular bond) is traditionally the job of an exchange or
associated entity. It comes with quite a bit of bureaucracy for financial
companies. So one near-term application for secure property titles is a quick,
streamlined way to deploy a new financial instrument (e.g. some new kind of
derivative or synthetic asset) without the traditional bureaucracy, yet with a
great degree of security regarding transfers and proving ownership. Basically
you implement secure titles for it (or for a synthetic asset, for its
components), and then you can either let people transfer with the registry
after they discover each other and negotiate out-of-band, or build an online
exchange on top of this instrument registry, or both. I also have in mind
tools to help design new kinds of synthetic assets.  
  
Another relatively easy class of applications involve creating new, DNS-like
public namespaces (i.e. ownership of names for particular purposes) to be used
by some community. Also we might convince one or more DNS sub-domains to
switch to this more secure and less politically controllable method.  
  
Basically it's bringing the Bitcoin revolution to other kinds of digital
property besides just money, and starting by making defining new kinds of
digital property easy (since as you point out the old kinds already have
established registries).  
  
Since I'm working on some of this myself, anybody who wants to work on this
feel free to e-mail me so we can coordinate or at least not overly duplicate
efforts. My basic starting point is node.js, (including a node.js to act as a
client that has different security assumptions than a browser, but can still
take advantage of browsers for the UIs, all JavaScript in the same event
oriented-style) but I'm open to new ideas or new implementations of a crypto
plugin for node.js (which would presumably be in C or C++).

