To get from John Rawls' "veil of ignorance" argument to his (and worse, most
of his followers') favored wealth redistribution schemes requires (besides the
ultimate fatal conceit that ignorant people can make rational contracts, as
well as the dubious idea that we can pretend that we are ignorant of our own
actual preferences) the rather extreme degree of risk aversion embodied in the
"maximin" principle. As wikipedia summarizes maximin, "economic inequalities
are only permitted insofar as they benefit the least well off members of
society." How extreme the risk aversion this principle gives us depends on how
small the group constituting the "least well of members" are...you get into
strange and intractable triage hypotheticals about saving the life of one
person up to the point where you'd cause the starvation of another...define
your "least well off" group small enough and North Korea ends up looking like
Beverly Hills in comparison to the maximin society.  
  
Except that death in Rawlstopia would be a pleasant Kevorkian-type suicide: if
anybody died a painful early death, they'd be the worst off, so we must expend
all excess resources to extend their lives to whatever slight extent possible
and then give them a merciful sendoff. Others may be saved and fed only insfar
as their talents are needed to attend to these worst of the worst off.
Otherwise, when the worst off go it's the Kevorkian drip for the other eaters,
too.  
  
Although many academics declare their intuition agrees with being very risk
averse, those intutions are not made from behind the veil of ignorance, but
from their position as (usually) kids of upper middle class origins who have
never had a full-time non-academic job. Real poor people often act in a _risk-
seeking_ fashion, for example by buying lottery tickets.

