MM: Treaty of Paris  
  
Calling something a "State" does not make it such. Our "States" were sovereign
states neither before the Revolutionary War nor after the Constitution (the
Treay Power clearly rests external sovereignty with the federal government,
and there is also the Supremacy Clause), nor were they completely sovereign
under the Articles of Confederation. Correct me if I'm wrong, but most if not
all diplomacy leading up to and after the Treaty of Paris was conducted by
ambassadors chosen by the Continental Congress, not from the individual
States.  
  
And regardless of this history, States if they ever were sovereign have long
since lost their sovereignty by adverse possession. Nor is it all a good idea
from a policy perspective to advocate anything but a further weakening of
States. In particular the notion of the "police power", which is found nowhere
in the Constitution, needs to be abolished.  
  
"As of course you are well aware, "law" in the usual sense of the term simply
creates a default contract for those who interact casually in ways that make
agreement on individual terms not cost-effective."  
  
Law _should_ be like this, but it's often not. The two most important
examples: the range of choice for choice-of-law and choice-of-forum clauses is
far too narrow, and the ability to set penalties for certain breaches of
contract is far too limited. These two areas should be the focus of efforts to
make contracts more law-like and provide more of the good kind of (i.e. ex
ante) legal competition. This kind of incremental change is far more important
than selling shares in government or other such fascinating but hubristic
ideas.

