DN: "Sure, the best smart contracts are self-enforcing, but disputes are
unavoidable."  
  
Given the extremely high costs, when compared to computer operations, of both
human dispute resolution in particlar and trusted third parties in security
protocols generally, the best way to deal with disputes will often be what in
law we call "the common law rule of tough": on occasion the outcome of
applying the rules to the facts will be unfair, and that's just tough luck.
Sometimes there is a bug and and somebody has to absorb the costs. That's the
philosophy of both common law and software protocols.  
  
The competing philosophy, equity, tries to resolve each and every dispute
fairly. If the rules applied to the facts are not fair, the judge simply
decides what seems fair to him. This is a very expensive proposition in law.
Giving judges this discretion leads to uncertainty and arbitrariness at least
as often as it leads to greater fairness. Equity is, perhaps thankfully, quite
unavailable for smart contracts, unless we count random number generators. :-)  
  
Because they are computer protocols, the numbers of orders of magnitude
efficiency gain turning, where possible, contractual terms into self-enforcing
smart contracts -- even at the cost of occasional injustice -- is quite large.
And a wide variety of new kinds of contracts, such as many new consumer
derivatives and nanobarter, are made possible that are quite infeasible with
just paper or mere signed text.  
  
Of course, as yet only a tiny fraction of legal rules and contractual terms
can be translated into software, and then often only in a highly abstracted
manner. When the smart contract by itself produces enough unfairness, one can
still use smart contracts to shift the burden of lawsuit, in the same way that
repo men shift the burden of who has to sue over possession of a car.

