Alrenous, I doubt the objection applies in your case but I've seen many
supposedly knowledgeable historians and political scientists ask primarily
"what should the country have done" kind of questions, which are useless
except as a starting point for analysis. Even your sentence rewritten for newt
is of limited usefulness until we dig down to subunits and individuals and ask
why would each of them have wanted to disband the Guards, and if so how could
they have done it. Very complex questions, I know, but necessary for reasoning
about history, and why we should, where possible, rely on tradition rather
than our own reason for answers to social questions.  
  
(That still leaves plenty for our reason to do, reason about traditions).  
  
On your reply to me, I'm not sure how to "make" a new institution
automatically legitimate in the Roman context. Sacred tradition said that
traditional republican institutions like the Senate were the source of
legitimacy. And the emperors went to great efforts to have themselves deified
(ending in the compromise that deceased good emperors were deified). In the
modern context, we have written constitutions combined with oaths and mass
media and public school propaganda to provide legitimacy. (Indeed, with the
breakdown of central-source mass media we may see a breakdown of legitimacy of
institutions that were only deemed legitimate because mass media acted as if
they were).  
  
BTW, in the comments for the post previous to this I'm soliciting feedback and
commentary about what folks would or would not like me to blog about over the
next two years. I'm thinking of scaling back my blogging considerably if
there's a lack of interest, but of writing more in areas where there's
interest. Thanks in advance.

