Nick Szabo's Papers and Concise Tutorials Copyright (c) 2007 by Nick Szabo  

### Part I

The first part of this essay discusses the first and largest underseas
extraction activity, offshore oil and gas, and especially the more recent
activity in deep water oil. First, however, there is currently a fasionable
topic, the discussion of which will help put deep water oil in perspective:
namely the nonsense about "peak oil" \-- the theory that worldwide oil
production has or will soon peak and that we thus inevitably face a future of
higher oil prices.

_Layout of the Total Girassol field, off the shore of Angola in 1,400 meters
of water, showing the FPSO ship, risers, flow lines, and subsea trees (well
caps and valves on the sea floor)._

### Why peak oil is nonsense

There are any number of reasons why peak oil is nonsense, such as tar sands
and coal gasification. Perhaps the most overlooked, however, is that up until
now oil companies have focused on land and shallow seas, which are relatively
easy to explore. But there is no reason to expect that oil, which was largely
produced by oceans in the first place (especially by the precipitation of dead
plankton), is any more scarce underneath our eon's oceans as it is under our
lands. Oceans cover over two-thirds of our planet's surface, and most of that
is deep water (defined in this series as ocean floor 1,000 meters or more
below the surface). A very large fraction of the oil on our planet remains to
be discovered in deep water. Given a reasonable property rights regime
enforced by major developed world powers, this (along with the vast tar sands
in Canada) means not only copious future oil, but that this oil can mostly
come from politically stable areas.

_The FPSO, riser towers and flow lines in Total 's Girassol field off of
Angola._

Some perspective, even some purely theoretical perspective, is in order. If we
look at the problem at the scale of the solar system, we find that
hydrocarbons are remarkably common -- Titan has clouds and lakes of ethane and
methane, for example, and there are trillions of tonnes of hydrocarbons, at
least, to be found on comets and in the atmospheres and moons of the gas giant
planets. What is far more scarce in the solar system is free oxygen. If there
will ever be a "peak" in the inputs to hydrocarbon combustion in the solar
system it will be in free oxygen -- which as a natural occurence is extremely
rare beyond Earth's atmosphere, and is rather expensive to make artificially.

_A deep sea "robot hand" on a ROV (Remotely Operated Vehicle) more often than
not ends in an attachment specific for the job. Here, a subsea hydraulic
grinder and a wire brush. _

What's even more scarce, however, are habitable planets that keep a proper
balance between greenhouse gases and sunlight. Venus had a runaway greenhouse,
partly from being closer to the sun and partly because of increased carbon
dioxide in its atmosphere which acts like an inulating blanket, preventing
heat from radiating away quickly enough. The result is that Venus' surface
temperature is over 400 C (that's over 750 fahrenheit), hotter than the
surface of Mercury. On Mars most of its atmosphere escaped, due to its low
gravity, and its water, and eventually even much of its remaining carbon
dioxide, froze, again partly due the greater distance from the sun and partly
due the low level of greenhouse gases in its generally thin atmosphere.

_Hydraulic subsea bandsaw. Great for cutting pipes as shown here._

So far, the Earth has been "just right", but the currently rapidly rising
amount of carbon dioxide and methane in our atmosphere, largely from the
hydrocarbons industries, is moving our planet in the direction of Venus.
Nothing as extreme as Venus is in our foreseeable future, but neither will
becoming even a little bit more like Venus be very pleasant for most of us.
The real barrier to maintaining our hydrocarbon-powered economy is thus not
"peak oil", but emissions of carbon dioxide and methane with the resulting
global warming. That peak oil is nonsense makes global warming even more
important problem to solve, at least in the long term. We won't avoid it by
oil naturally becoming too expensive; instead we must realize that our
atmosphere is a scarce resource and make property out of it, as we did with
"acid rain."

This series isn't mainly about oil or the atmosphere, however; it is about the
technology (and perhaps some of the politics and law) about extracting
minerals generally from the deep sea. Oil is the first deep sea mineral to be
extracted from the sea on a large scale. The rest of this article fill look at
some of the technology used to recover offshore oil, especially in deep water.
Future posts in this series will look at mining other minerals off the ocean
floor.

_Painting of the deepwater (1,350 meters) subsea trees at the Total Girassol
field. They 're not really this close together._

### FPSOs

Once the wells have been dug, the main piece of surface equipment that remains
on the scene, especially in deep water fields where pipelines to the seashore
are not effective, is the Floating Production, Storage, and Offloading (FPSO)
platform. The FPSO is usually an oil tanker that has been retrofitted with
special equipment, which often injects water into wells, pumps the resulting
oil from the sea floor, performs some processing on the oil (such as removing
seawater and gases that have come out with the oil), stores it, and then
offloads it to oil tankers, which ship it to market for refining into gasoline
and other products. The FPSO substitutes far from shore and in deep water for
pipes going directly to shore (the preferred technique for shallows wells
close to a politically friendly shoreline).

Many billions of dollars typically are invested in developing a single deep
water oil field, with hundreds of millions spent on the FPSO alone. According
to Wikipedia, the world's largest FPSO is operated by Exxon Mobil near Total's
deep water field off Angola: "The world's largest FPSO is the _Kizomba A_ ,
with a storage capacity of 2.2 million barrels. Built at a cost of over US$800
million by Hyundai Heavy Industries in Ulsan, Korea, it is operated by Esso
Exploration Angola (ExxonMobil). Located in 1200 meters (3,940 ft) of water at
Deepwater block 15,200 statute miles (320 km) offshore in the Atlantic Ocean
from Angola, West Africa, it weighs 81,000 tonnes and is 285 meters long, 63
meters wide, and 32 meters high ((935 ft by 207 ft by 105 ft)."

### ROVs

Today's ROVs (Remotely Operated Vehicles) go far beyond the little treasure-
recovery sub you may have seen in "Titanic." There are ROVs for exploration,
rescue, and a wide variety of other undersea activities. Most interesting are
the wide variety of ROVs used for excavation -- for dredging channels, for
trenching, laying, and burying pipe, and for maintaining the growing variety
of undersea equipment. Due to ocean-crossing cables and deep sea oil fields,
it is now common for ROVs to conduct their work in thousands of meters of
water, far beyond the practical range of divers.

_A grab excavator ROV._

It should be noted that in contrast to space vehciles, where teleprogramming
via general commands is the norm, and often involves long time delays between
the commands being sent and the results being known to the spacecraft's
operators, with undersea operations real-time interaction is the norm. Due to
operator fatigue and the costs of maintaining workers on offshore platforms,
research is being done on fully automating certain undersea tasks, but the
current state of the art remains a human closely in the loop. The costs of
maintaining workers on platforms is vastly lower than the cost of maintaining
an astronaut in space, so the problem of fully automating undersea operations
is correspondingly less important. Nevertheless, many important automation
problems, such as the simplification of operations, have had to be solved in
order to make it possible for ROVs to replace divers at all.

_A ROV for digging trenches, used when laying undersea cable or pipe._

Another important consideration is that ROVs depend on their tethers to
deliver not only instructions but power. An untethered robot lacks power to
perform many required operations, especially excavation. At sea as long as the
tether is delivering power it might as well deliver real-time interactive
instructions and sensor data, i.e. teleoperation as well.

Trenching and other high-power ROVs are usually referred to as "work class."
There are over 400 collectively worth more than $1.5 billion in operation
today and their numbers are increasingly rapidly.

_Tankers are big, but storms can be bigger._

### Harsh Conditions

Besides deep water and the peril of storms anywhere at sea, many offshore
fields operate under other kinds of harsh conditions. The White Rose and Sea
Rose fields of Newfoundland start by excavating "glory holes" dug down into
the sea floor to protect the seafloor against icebergs which can project all
the way to the fairly shallow sea floor. Inside these holes the oil outflow
and fluid injection holes themselves are dug and capped with subsea trees
(valves). The drill platform, FPSO, and some of the other equipment has been
reinforced to protect against icebergs.

In future installments, I 'll look at diamond mining and the startups that
plan to mine the oceans for copper, gold, and other minerals.

### Part II

#### Beyond Oil

The first installment of this series looked at the most highly developed
offshore extraction industry, offshore oil. A wide variety of minerals besides
oil are extracted on land. As technology improves, and as commodity prices
remain high, more minerals are being extracted from beneath the sea. The first
major offshore mineral beyond oil, starting in the mid 1990s, was diamond.
More recently, there has been substantial exploration, research, and
investment towards the development of seafloor massive sulfide (SMS) deposits,
which include gold, copper, and several other valuable metals in high
concentrations. Today we look at mining diamonds from the sea.

#### Diamond

_De Beers ' mining ship for their first South African marine diamond mine_

The first major area after oil was opened up by remotely operated vehicles
(ROVs) in the 1990s -- marine diamond mining. The current center of this
activity is Namibia, with offshore reserves estimated at more than 1.5 billion
carats. The companies mining or planning to mine the Namibian sea floor with
ROVs include Nambed (a partnership between the government and DeBeers, and the
largest Namibian diamond mining company), Namco (which has been mining an
estimated 3 million carats since discovering its subsea field in 1996),
Diamond Fields Intl. (which expects to mine 40,000 carats a year from the sea
floor), and Afri-Can (another big concession holder which is currently
exploring its concessions and hopes to ramp up to large-scale undersea
operations). Afri-Can has been operating a ship and crawler (ROV) that vacuums
up 50 tons per hour gravel from a sea floor 90 to 120 meters below the surface
and process the gravel for the diamonds. They found 7.2 carats of diamond per
100 cubic meters of gravel, which means the field is probably viable and
further sampling is in order.

DeBeers is also investing in a diamond mine in the seas off South Africa. A
retrofitted ship will be used featuring a gravel processing planet capable of
sorting diamonds from 250 tons of gravel per hour. It is hoped the ship will
produce 240,000 carats a year when fully operational.

The ship will engage in

> horizontal mining, utilising an underwater vehicle mounted on twin
Caterpillar tracks and equipped with an anterior suction system...The
crawler's suction systems are equipped with water jets to loosen seabed
sediments and sorting bars to filter out oversize boulders. The crawler is
fitted with highly accurate acoustic seabed navigation and imaging systems. On
board the vessel will be a treatment plant consisting of a primary screening
and dewatering plant, a comminution mill sector followed by a dense media
separation plant and finally a diamond recovery plant.

In other words, a ROV will vacuum diamond-rich gravel off the sea floor,
making a gravel slurry which is then piped to the ship, where it is then
sifted for the diamonds. This is similar to the idea of pumping oil from the
sea floor onto a FPSO \-- a ship which sits over the wells and processes the
oil, separates out the water, stores it, and offloads it onto visting oil
tankers. However with marine diamond mining, instead of a fixed subsea tree
capping and valving a pressurized oil field, a mobile ROV vacuums up a gravel
slurry to be pumped through hoses to the ship.

By contrast to this horizontal marine mining, vertical mining "uses a 6 to 7
meter diameter drill head to cut into the seabed and suck up the diamond
bearing material from the sea bed."

Coming soon: some new startup companies plan to mine extinct black smokers for
copper, gold, and other valuable metals.

### Part III

In the first two parts of this series I described undersea oil and diamond
mining operations. In addition at least two startup companies, Neptune
Minerals and Nautilus Minerals, are moving into mining the seafloor for
metals. They're planning to dig into extinct black smokers for copper, and
possibly also zinc, gold, silver, and other minerals. David Heydon, CEO of
Nauilus Minerals, says of the remarkably high quality of the ores, "we havent
seen these types of mineral deposits since the beginning of modern mining."

Nautilus and Neptune don't plan to mine live black smokers, which would be
dangerous (black smokers are hot springs with temperatures well above 200
centigrade, although not boiling because at high pressure) and environmentally
questionable (live black smokers team with exotic chemosynthetic life).
Rather, they plan to mine the probably far greater number of extinct and
lifeless black smokers that populate the oceans.

_Nautilus paydirt: Cutting of an extinct black smoker at 1,600 meters._

Geologist Steven Scott, a longtime advocate of sea mining, describes the
geology of seafloor massive sulfides (SMS's). "These deposits are essentially
metalliferous mud formed from hot, dense brines." They form within and around
black smokers, the famous deep-sea vents discovered in 1979. Black smokers
deposit "sinter-like mounds and chimneys of metal sulfides, oxides, silica and
sulfates. Veins, disseminations and stockworks of relatively low metal grade
impregnate the underlying lavas."

Curiously, we may already be mining black smokers: billion-year-old, long-
extinct black smokers whose remains now lie on dry land.  "The [current live
black smoker] deposits have similarities to so-called volcanogenic massive
sulfide ores being mined on land in Canada and elsewhere and which formed in
ancient oceans as much as 2700 million years ago. Elements of potential
commercial interest in both the modern and ancient deposits are copper, zinc,
lead, silver, gold and barium. About 150 seafloor sites are known, most of
which lie between 1500 and 3500 meters water depth."

####

_Neptune paydirt, topside._

Both Neptune and Nautilus recently performed assays of several promising
extinct smokers. Nautilus ' assay was performed by two methods: a drill based
on a ship (but dropped through 1600 meters of water) and a remotely operated
vehicle (ROV) that took cutting samples. Here are at least some of the
results. Heydon observes that "with 97% of the ocean floor yet to be
extensively explored, it is likely that numerous deposits remain
undiscovered."

Here is more from Steven Scott.

#### Business Plans

Nautilus estimates that it could cost as much as $300 million to ramp up to
full-scale mining. Its plans include a $120 million specialized mining ship,
the _Jules Verne_. This ship is similar to the FPSO used for deep sea oil, but
will separate ore from sludge and water rather than oil from water. A large
ROV, based on the trencher ROV used to lay pipes in the deep sea oil industry,
but adding a large rotating drum scraper like those used in coal mining, will
scrape the smokers creating sludge which will be pumped up to the _Jules
Verne_ and processed. Since the most expensive FPSOs can cost upwards of $800
million, the $120 million is a relative bargain. Indeed, the basic
mothership/ROV setup is taken straight from the deep sea oil industry FPSO/ROV
methodology.

> Nautilus will contribute $120 million to develop undersea tools, including
pumps, pipes and two subsea crawler-miners. It will also partner with a group
of engineering companies with expertise in drilling and geophysics. If _Jules
Verne_ is in place by 2009, it could stay at the Papua New Guinea site until
2014, before moving on to exploit other deposits. Nautilus estimates that it
will be able to mine 6000 tonnes a day from its target site.

>

> Although there are technological hurdles to be overcome, ...  'the
technology already exists; it just hasn't been integrated in this way. One
beauty of the sea floor model is that a floating equipment production chain is
our one main investment. Once we have the chain we can easily bring it up and
redeploy it to another area.'

(More on Nautilus' plans here).

_Nautilus ' ROV with cutting arm to take samples._

Like many start-ups, Nautilus has a speculative and risky business plan, but
the payoff could be vast:

> [Nautilus] doesn't expect to reach first-scale production until 2009.
There's no comparable traditional mining business model, since many of the
individual deposits underwater are too small to be economically viable if they
were on land. But because offshore drilling operations can move, whereas mines
on land are stuck, the combined value of deposits in a wider area makes the
operation worthwhile.

>

> ... The worth of the oil, gas and minerals in the world's oceans is
estimated to be in the trillions of dollars. If Mr. Heydon's estimates are
correct, deep sea mining could have the potential to supply the world's
growing demand for gold, copper and silver, among other metals. The resulting
revenue could be in the billions of dollars for deep sea mining companies, of
which only two currently exist.

>

> ... Disputes over who owns what in the ocean have been a fact of global
politics for decades. For reasons of security, potential resources and
sometimes just pride, countries are constantly claiming control over new
chunks of underwater property. As an indicator of just how rare it is to be
able to mine hassle-free in the ocean, the exploration licence Papua New
Guinea granted Nautilus was a world first.

More here.  See also here. Note: Earlier versions of portions of this article
previously appeared on the author's blog, Unenumerated and on comments the
author has made on various blogs.

### References

Comments and criticisms to  
Nick Szabo's Papers and Concise Tutorials

