 _PS. I suppose, nothing prevents a sufficiently corrupt railroad from selling
the arrester, pocketing the money and asking farmers for another one..._  
  
Exactly. Or the farmer from threatening to tear up the railroad tracks, should
the law (or lack thereof) allow. Friedman completely ignores the most
important set of cases, the negative-sum games (a.k.a. coercive bargains,
a.k.a. extortion), the cases which prove the Coase Theorem false. Friedman is
proceeding from a false premise, so there is no reason to expect he reaches
true conclusions.  
  
Clayton: the problem with Friedman's account of tort law is that he thinks
tort law can be constructed from contracts between legal protection agencies,
because as a Coase Theorist he sweeps the problem of coercive bargaining under
the rug. As I have shown, tort law cannot originate from efficient bargaining,
or anything close to it: coercive bargains are generally negative-sum games.
Good tort and property law that greatly reduce opportunities for coercive
bargaining are required before contract bargaining is anything close to
efficient. Indeed one could not call it contract bargaining at all, it would
be treaty bargaining between hostile powers. Stopping coercion is the most
important problem, both for politics and law-and-economics, and the Coase
Theorem is worse than useless for reasoning about it, because it is false in
just those sets of cases.  
  
I have read tons of Friedman and nothing whatsoever I have read leads me to
believe that he has dealt in any reasonable way with this problem. If anybody
has specific quotes of his you think refutes my proof, or any of my other
claims, feel free to post them here.

