Paul, you're mostly talking above my head there, but I'd love to learn more
about these statistical methods. Friendly references?  
  
Fred and Paul, I have read that differencing tends to exaggerate noise and
lead to invalid rejection of true relationships, and that one has to guard
against that as well as the accumulation of errors which the differencing
method eliminates. I'm guessing this is what Paul is addressing with his
sophisticated proposals.  
  
Fred, what do you think about a correlation for a series that ends up roughly
at the level where it started? The series I have in mind are implied inflation
expectations derived from the monthly dollar gold and oil prices from January
1974 to June 2008. In other words, take the gold and oil prices, deflate them
for the already occurred CPI, deflate oil for the 0.9% average secular
fundamental rise wrt gold described above, and derive the rate of long-term
price rises for gold and oil respectively implied if gold and oil represent
the net present value given that price (assuming a certain price of gold and
oil reflect expectations of zero price rise -- OK to do because correlation is
concerned with the relative not the absolute). The result is a large positive
correlation, 0.76, strongly suggesting that the long-term trends in oil and
gold prices each reflect a common estimate of future inflation -- gold and oil
fundamentals are very different and so cannot lead to such strong correlation.
This compared to two random walks with no long-term tendency to rise, which on
average have no correlation.  
  
If you look at the graph (see the update above) of the implied inflation you
see that the gold-implied inflation starts at 5.1% in 1974 and ends at 5.2%
today, and the oil-implied inflation also starts at about 5% in 1974 and ends
at about 5.5% today, with fluctuations for both as high as 7% and as low as
2.5%.

