I've written about geographic patterns that demonstrate the importance of
securing as well as producing wealth (link below). These have shaped forms of
government and law. Hunter-gatherer tribes, under which our instincts evolved,
had no need of large organizations, governments, or law as we know it. The
dawn of agriculture was probably made possible, not by the discovery that food
plants could be grown from seeds (this would have been obvious to a hunter-
gatherer), but in solving the much harder problem of how to protect this
capital investment over the course of a planting-growing-harvesting-storage
cycle from fellow human beings. This required internal law and external
security exercised much more thoroughly and over a larger area. It was
securing the production, more than the production itself, that required
eventually radical organizational evolution.  
  
Once farmland became the main source of wealth, there were substantial
economies of scale in protecting it. This posed a difficulty in forming
organizations larger than tribes; those cultures that could coordinate larger
militaries slowly displaced tribes that could not. This led to a wide variety
of governmental forms, but they tended to have in common that the military
consumed the bulk of the otherwise insecure agricultural surplus. The primary
legal form was that of real property, usually claimed by military lords and
their heirs.  
  
The next phase appeared sporadically and temporarily among city-states that
dealt most in goods (included harvested and transportable agricultural
commodities) rather than farmland. As cultures became centered around trade
and industry, converting from farmland to goods as the main source of wealth,
they also tended to convert to from feudal monarchies to republics (or as we
tend to call them now, democracies). Contract law became as or more important
than real property law. Real property became much more alienable, either sold
outright or pledged as security for insurance or investments.  
  
As most wealth became mobile, taxes became centered on trade and income -- on
wealth transfers that require crossing borders or crossing trust barriers --
rather than on wealth. During the same centuries as the rise of republics,
cheap paper made widespread monolinguistic merchant communities more
effective. The printing press gave rise to modern national languages, making
large-scale organizations such as the modern corporation and nation-state
possible. This led to substantial efficiency gains both in the security of
production (and of the accompanying trade) as well as in the production and
trade themselves.  
  
Technology and economy have now once again leapt ahead of government and law:
now in the most developed countries it's no longer goods, but services and
information, which increasingly create wealth. It's still almost anybody's
guess what organizational forms will be needed to produce and secure service
value and information wealth, and for that matter whether such wealth will
take the legal forms that have appeared with goods-centered republics (e.g.
patents and copyrights) or whether new more security-efficient forms of
property and contract will emerge. I expect smart contracts and related
protocols to play an important role.  
  
More about security and history here.

