"Technological neutrality" is a hot topic in government surveillance law. It
posits that new technologies (such as WiFi and cryptography) that enhance
privacy should be required, by law, to be altered in order to provide
governments the same amount of ability to spy on private conversations as they
had with previous technology. The argument is that we must decrease our legal
rights in order to hold constant governments' abilities to spy on us.  
  
A big assumption lies in choosing the technological baseline of surveillance.
Usually this is, conveniently for governments, chosen to correspond to some
high-water mark of surveillance, for example the copper era when phone
exchanges were centralized and wiretaps required only splicing together copper
cables.  
  
The most accurate baseline, however, is the baseline abilities of surveillance
that our laws, especially our Constitutional laws, were designed for. In the
United States, the Fourth Amendment was designed for a world in which
governments had no ability to wiretap. If a government wanted to spy on your
conversation they had to do it the same way they can still do now -- by
following you around and listening in person (or at least in the next room).
On very rare occasions, you might write a letter and the government might open
your mail, for which "paper" the Fourth Amendment required a search warrant
based on swearing under oath that there was probable cause to suspect a crime
related to that mail.  
  
In short, the "technological neutrality" argument, if applied correctly, leads
to the opposite conclusion reached by its proponents. Rather than reacting to
privacy technologies by reducing further our legal rights, instead we should
be expanding our legal privacy rights and encouraging privacy technologies
until we return to the baseline of government surveillance abilities for which
the Fourth Amendment and similar protections were designed.

