 _That doesn't mean we should write laws that we expect to be broken under
particular circumstances, rather than writing them to take those circumstances
into account._  
  
Byrne, that's a thoughtful comment, but I can find at least four problems with
it:  
  
(1) we usually don't know more than a tiny fraction of what particular rare
circumstances need to be accounted for. Trying to account for even the more
probable cases gives rise to the vast complexity of our legal code as it
exists today. That complexity furthermore provides numerous opportunities for
lobbyists to slip in loopholes excepting _their_ circumstance from the law.  
  
(2) There are few actual proposals for specific language to make an exception
for the "ticking bomb" exception, and the ones I've seen are far too broad,
providing many opportunities for officials to abuse the exception. Here's an
exercise -- try actually drafting language to write a "ticking time-bomb"
exception into an otherwise absolute ban on torture. You'll find that,
whatever language you choose, it will still be full of holes. It will either
be hopelessly vague, or it will leave many important terrorist threats
unaddressed but at the same time will be too broad, introducing many
opportunities for officials to abuse the law by using torture where it there
is no urgent and important necessity for it.  
  
(3) It is vague exceptions and complexity that create ignorance of the law and
thereby encourage far more lawbreaking than would occur by leaving some rare
cases to the discretion of prosecutors and juries.  
  
(4) People usually don't debate politics in terms of finely drawn exceptions.
Even on the Congressional floor the debate doesn't go much beyond "allow
torture" vs. "ban torture." The "ticking time bomb" exception is in practice
usually used to justify very broad uses of torture; at the very least it turns
into a loophole you can drive a truck through.

