

#### Beyond Oil

The first installment of this series looked at the most highly developed
offshore extraction industry, offshore oil. A wide variety of minerals besides
oil are extracted on land. As technology improves, and as commodity prices
remain high, more minerals are being extracted from beneath the sea. The first
major offshore mineral beyond oil, starting in the mid 1990s, was diamond.
More recently, there has been substantial exploration, research, and
investment towards the development of seafloor massive sulfide (SMS) deposits,
which include gold, copper, and several other valuable metals in high
concentrations. Today we look at mining diamonds from the sea.  

#### Diamond

 _De Beers' mining ship for their first South African marine diamond mine_

The first major area after oil was opened up by remotely operated vehicles
(ROVs) in the 1990s -- marine diamond mining. The current center of this
activity is Namibia, with offshore reserves estimated at more than 1.5 billion
carats. The companies mining or planning to mine the Namibian sea floor with
ROVs include Nambed (a partnership between the government and DeBeers, and the
largest Namibian diamond mining company), Namco (which has been mining an
estimated 3 million carats since discovering its subsea field in 1996),
Diamond Fields Intl. (which expects to mine 40,000 carats a year from the sea
floor), and Afri-Can (another big concession holder which is currently
exploring its concessions and hopes to ramp up to large-scale undersea
operations). Afri-Can has been operating a ship and crawler (ROV) that vacuums
up 50 tons per hour gravel from a sea floor 90 to 120 meters below the surface
and process the gravel for the diamonds. They found 7.2 carats of diamond per
100 cubic meters of gravel, which means the field is probably viable and
further sampling is in order.  
  
DeBeers is also investing in a diamond mine in the seas off South Africa. A
retrofitted ship will be used featuring a gravel processing planet capable of
sorting diamonds from 250 tons of gravel per hour. It is hoped the ship will
produce 240,000 carats a year when fully operational.  
  
The ship will engage in  
  

> horizontal mining, utilising an underwater vehicle mounted on twin
Caterpillar tracks and equipped with an anterior suction system...The
crawler's suction systems are equipped with water jets to loosen seabed
sediments and sorting bars to filter out oversize boulders. The crawler is
fitted with highly accurate acoustic seabed navigation and imaging systems. On
board the vessel will be a treatment plant consisting of a primary screening
and dewatering plant, a comminution mill sector followed by a dense media
separation plant and finally a diamond recovery plant.

In other words, a ROV will vacuum diamond-rich gravel off the sea floor,
making a gravel slurry which is then piped to the ship, where it is then
sifted for the diamonds. This is similar to the idea of pumping oil from the
sea floor onto a FPSO \-- a ship which sits over the wells and processes the
oil, separates out the water, stores it, and offloads it onto visting oil
tankers. However with marine diamond mining, instead of a fixed subsea tree
capping and valving a pressurized oil field, a mobile ROV vacuums up a gravel
slurry to be pumped through hoses to the ship.  
  
By contrast to this horizontal marine mining, vertical mining "uses a 6 to 7
meter diameter drill head to cut into the seabed and suck up the diamond
bearing material from the sea bed."  
  
Coming soon: some new startup companies plan to mine extinct black smokers for
copper, gold, and other valuable metals.

