I often get asked to provide an overview of my political ideas. There are so
many elements to my ideas -- the importance of coercion and security and how
to reconcile coercion with the substantive common law principle of non-
initiation of force, the unique and crucial nature of procedural law, the role
of low exit costs in enabling freedom and motivating the creation of good law,
good vs. bad legal competition, the use (and intellectual recovery, where
necessary) of highly-evolved or promising ideas such as political property
rights, choice of law and forum, separation of duties with checks and
balances, limits on delegation, "smart" (technologically codified and
enforced) laws, and so on -- that it's impossible to write a summary article.
Therefore this post is more in the "link farm" style.  
  
There are hundreds of pages of reading material here. Which you should tackle
depends on which areas you disagree with or don't understand.  
  
Utopians -- those who think government is or could be an institution based on
voluntary agreements or peace, or anarchists who think voluntary or peaceful
interactions would dominate in the absence of legal procedure based on
coercion -- and those who don't know how such utopianism is readily rebutted
by real history, should first read my articles about the central role coercion
has, does, and will play in human interaction:  
  
Hampton Sides Sheds Light on Olson and Coase  
  
The Coase Theorem is False -- Contracts Depend on Tort Law  
  
  
The next set everybody should read, as you can't understand politics without
understanding the crucial role of legal procedure, and especially jurisdiction
(a way to quickly evaluate any proposed new form of government or legal
system: ask the proposer how arrest is distinguished from kidnapping, and
search and seizure from trespassing and theft -- if they can't give a good
answer, the proposal is based on ignorance and you need not waste any more of
your time on it):  
  
Why Legal Procedure Is Central to Politics  
  
Three Kinds of Jurisdiction  
  
Exit and Freedom  
  
Property In Everything  
  
Jurisdiction as Property  
  
Political Property and the Evolution of Liberty  
  
Unbundled Jurisdiction and Exit Costs  
  
Government for Profit  
  
Semayne's Case: Liberty of the House  
  
  
Next are some lessons from the Roman style of government -- based on agency
rather than political property rights. (This kind of government has dominated
Western political thought -- if you have not read the previous list of
articles it is probably the only way you can imagine that legal systems can
work):  
  
Democracy as Regular Rebellion  
  
The Principle of Least Authority  
  
Separation of Powers and Credible Commitment  
  
Executive Power and the Interpretation of Laws  
  
Unpredictable Elections  
  
  
Those interested in the United States Constitution -- whether you want to
emulate it, interpret it, revise it, or trash it -- will find the following of
use:  
  
Corporate Origins of the United States  
  
Charters and Judicial Review  
  
Due Process Property Rights  
  
Civil Liberties and the Forever War  
  
Comments on the United States Constitution (i, ii, iii)  
  
  
For those who want to explore the use of technology to help codify and enforce
law:  
  
Wet Code and Dry  
  
Security and the Burden of Lawsuit  
  
Smart Contracts  
  
Secure Property Titles with Owner Authority  
  
A Formal Legal Drafting Language  
  
Devices for Controlling Property  
  
Liar-Resistant Government  
  
  
For those who want to explore some related ideas on philosophy and history:  
  
The Irreducible Complexity of Society  
  
Objective versus Intersubjective Truth  
  
Hermeneutics  
  
An Introduction to Algorithmic Information Theory  
  
Book Consciousness  
  
Security and the Origins of Agriculture  
  
Patterns of Integrity  
  
Origins of the Joint-Stock Corporation  
  
  
Finally, some notes on political action:  
  
Ten Ways to Make a Political Difference  
  
  
Feel free to comment or ask questions about any of these or other of my
writings here.

