

Copyright (c) 1997 by Nick Szabo  
permission to redistribute without alteration hereby granted In the process of
cultural evolution loss accompanies progress. As we progress through, for
example, economic phases of civilization -- agriculutral, industrial,
information \-- concepts useful in one phase may become less useful (or at
least less used) in the next. Selected out, they become unavailable for use in
further phases. To rectify this we need a process of memetic archaeology. More
discussion of these these techniques can be found in my essay
"Hermeneutics"[0].  Here I use them to recover and reconstruct the idea of
privity. A sliver of this concept has remained in English contract law;
intriguing parallels have arisen in the author's profession, computer
security. I therefore undertake to recover and reconstruct this idea and see
where it can be applied in the information age. A quick web search on
"privity" reveals that its use is now dominated by contract law.[2] Here is a
typical definition.

PRIVITY OF CONTRACT. The relation which subsists between two contracting
parties. Hamm. on Part. 182. [3]

Here being "in privity" to a contract is simply defined as being a party to
the contract. We can get more insight by looking into the requirements for
becoming such a party, by forming such a contract. The chief requirement is a
"meeting of the minds". Lysander Spooner described the relationship of legal
privity as being one of "mutual recognition, consent, and agreement"[1].

We have to go back more than a century to find significant usage of the word
beyond its parched modern usage in English law. In English literature prior to
the 20th century, the word "privity" appears in contexts which indicate two
connotations. The first, most linguistically obvious connotation, is that one
has "privity" to an event if one has knowledge of it that is shared by few
others. In this interpretation it means being privy to an event. The second
connotation is that one assents to that event, or to its consequences. The
event might have been called to the attention of others; it or its
consequences might have been prevented or avoided. "Privity" thus often
carries the connotation of moral or legal responsibility. This event is
usually, furthermore, some human action; what contract law refers to as
"performance" when such action has been promised.

In an English translation of Josephus a delegation of authority (in legal
terms, agency) is rendered thusly: "Conquer him by the forces that are under
thy command, without my privity"[4]. Similarly Shakespeare[5] writes about
action taken "without the privity of the King". "Without" here carries the
connotation of "beyond", as in lying outside of a boundary. "Privity" is thus
seens as a boundary defined by the scope of knowledge (usually accompanied by
consent) of the agents in question.

One of the earlier occurence of "privity" describes a purely subjective
phenonenon: the "privity" between a person and a god he believes in and
worships. The 14th-century mystical tome of Walter Hilton, _The Scale of
Ladder of Perfection_[5], emphasizes the "privity of spiritual love". Between
two people we might call this "empathy". This gives us a species of what
Michael Polanyi describes as "tacit knowledge"[6], knowledge which cannot be
articulated but must remain subjective. Furthermore, even explicit knowledge
of special circumstances is widely dispersed[8]. The basis of privity is the
distribution of knowledge, both articulable and implicit.

The modern legal principle of "privity"[2] has been modified in many
jurisdictions by the doctrine foreseeability. The fixed, clear boundary of
foreseeability around a contract provided by privity is erased, in an attempt
to define the scope of responsibility as "foreseeability" in particular cases.
This reflects the computational hubris of the legal positivists. This third-
party subjective imposition on the legal process may be one of the major
causes of the spiralling tort costs in the U.S. in the latter half of the 20th
century.

A nineteenth-century legal definition of "privity" further describes a
relationship between person and property; an interesting use of the word which
I will expand upon below.

####  Reconstructing Privity

Privacy is obviously a close relative, linguistically and semantically, to
privity. One has "privacy" with respect to some information precisesly against
those with whom one is not in privity, in the early "privy to" sense. In
contract law, "privity" refers only implicitly to some relative lack of third
party knowledge, but refers directly to third party _control_ at law. In
reconstructing privity for our own uses, we can generalize the concept to
refer to lack of both third party knowledge _and_ control.

This brings us to an interesting parallel which shows the utility of this
revitalized concept of privity in the information age. Our definition of
privity now corresponds to the passive and active attacks against a data
security system. Passive attacks against privacy are epitomized by Eve, the
eavesdropper. Active attacks against performance are epitomized by Mallet, a
malicious interferer.[9]

Having added control to privacy, privity becomes a meta-relationship: a
relationship between a relationship in which certain parties are in privity,
and third parties who lie outside the bounds of that relationship. This
recovered and reconstructed privity, or generalized privity, is the protection
of the contents and activtities of a relationship (or specifically, the terms
and performance of a contract) from third parties.

Privity thus encompasses property rights as stable objects linked to
particular contracts (and thereby the parties in privity to such contracts,
the "owners"). It lets us analyze the basis of property rights as not merely
Lockean "mixing of labor", but as a matter of knowledge, stability, and
incentive. Property as the privity of objects to a contract encompasses the
myriad exceptions to strict single-owner property rights found in legal
traditions: liens, collateral, etc. With its forebears, this new privity
carries the connotation of responsibility by those parties for the activities
within the contract. It creates a clear boundary within which operate a
coherent set of rights, responsibilities, and the knowledge with which to
carry out those responsibilities and protect those rights. Perhaps most
importantly, recovered privity gives us a basis for analyzing new claims
regarding new kinds of property (especially "intellectual property").

Our recovered privity also drives a stake through the heart of "social
contract" theory. This argument was well made both by Edward, Earl of
Clarendon[7] and Lysander Spooner[1].

We now have recovered and reconstructed a much more general, useful privity
than the sterile definition left in 20th century legal textbooks. This new and
renewed idea of privity, as clarified boundaries of knowledge, control, and
responsibility within and between relationships, is ideal for specifying a
variety of cyberspace relationships, whether informal or formalized via legal
code or software.

    
    
    References:
    [0] My web essays can be found under http://www.best.com/~szabo/
    [1] Lysander Spooner, "No Treason: The Constitution of No Authority"
    [2] Palmer, _The Paths to Privity: The History of Third-Party Beneficiary Contracts at English Law_
    [3] John Bouvier, _A Law Dictionary_ , http://www.constitution.org/bouv/bouvierp.txt
    [4] English translation of Josephus by William Whiston.  http://wesley.nnc.edu/josephus/ant-18.htm
    [5]  William Shakespeare, "Henry VIII".  http://the-tech.mit.edu/Shakespeare/History/kinghenryviii/kinghenryviii.1.1.html
    [5] The 14th-century mystical tome of Walter Hilton, The Scale or Ladder 
    _of Perfection_ http://ccel.wheaton.edu/hilton/ladder/ladder-PART-3.html
    [6] Michael Polanyi, _Personal Knowledge_ [7] Edward, Earl of Clarendon, "A Survey of Hobbes and His Leviathan"
    http://socserv2.socsci.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/hobbes/clarend
    [8] Friedrich Hayek, "On the Use of Knowledge in Society"
    [9] Bruce Schneier, _Applied Cryptography_

Please send your comments to

