Here's a comment I just made on another blog to illustrate how rapidly
commodity prices can change with small changes in inflation expectations (you
can check the result using the "NPV" or similar function in your spreadsheet):  
  
 _Increased expectations of inflation in future decades, from 1998 (near the
end of a decade when deflation was the main worry) to today (even Alan
Greenspan said in his recent book to expect 4.5%/year from here on out, and
that was well before the Bear Stearns bailout), can easily account for a
factor of 14 increase. For example, a Hotelling nonrenewable commodity for
which there are no changes in expected consumption (assume the expectation
covers the next 100 years), but there is a change in expected inflation from
1.75%/year over that time to 4.50%/year over that time, gives us a factor of
14.3 increase in the commodity price._  
  
Of course, as the St. Petersburg paradox suggests, the 100 year figure is
somewhat arbitrary. Restrict the time horizon to 50 years and the inflation
expectations have to increase more dramatically, e.g. from 1.0% to 6.5%, to
translate into a factor of 14 increase in the price of a Hotelling commodity.
At the other extreme expectations over 200 years need to only increase from
2.6% to 4.0% to account for that factor of 14.  
  
If you are a Saudi prince who can expect his great-granchildren to still own a
share of the Saudi oil fields in 200 years, the 200 year figure is
appropriate, but in most other cases property rights are less secure and
shorter timeframes are appropriate. Furthermore, there are too many
technological jokers over 200 years to expect the non-substitutability
assumption to hold (for example, somebody might genetically engineer a cheap
biofuel).

