Anonymous (choose a handle, please, so we can distinguish the different
anonymous participants, thanks):  
  
 _Are you saying that there is a fixed amount of resources and that they must
be shared among the population, so with a larger population everyone gets
less?_  
  
Almost. What happens is, that at any given fixed level of technology and
institutional arrangements, the most fertile land is generally already being
farmed and so an extra person must get their food from less fertile farmland.
So there are extra resources available but they are more expensive to use. For
food that requires more labor per unit of nutrition, and so nutrition per
capita thus declines. (Until recent centuries in the developed world, per
capita nutrition can be treated as equivalent to per capita income for the
vast majority of the population, as food constituted the great majority of
expenditures).  
  
 _Secondly, how do populations move between the isocline? Is it the discovery
of new energy sources_  
  
New energy sources is one possibility, although in the epochs I'm describing
it's largely agrarian capital investments (e.g. accumulating more cattle or
building irrigation ditches) and innovations (e.g. hay, more or better use of
nitrogen-fixing plants, property rights arrangements that are more secure or
provide better incentives), or the decay or destruction of capital investments
and the forgetting of innovations that moved the isocline "northeast" or
"southwest" respectively over the long term. Over shorter periods, very large
short-term fluctuations of the isocline (that swamped the effects of
innovation over these short periods) were caused by weather, pests, and other
variables impacting annual harvests. Wars could have a major temporary impact;
their long-term impact on the isocline depended on how they influenced
institutions.

