 _Progress in the Malthusian isocline in England from the 13th through 19th
centuries, as, among many other factors, horses slowly replaced oxen for farm
work and transport, the ratio of draft animals to people increased, and more
arable land was devoted to fodder relative to food.(click to enlarge)_  

  
I have previously discussed Great Britain's unprecedented escape from the
Malthusian trap. Such escapes require virtuous cycles, i.e. positive feedback
loops that allow productive capital to accumulate faster than it is destroyed.
There are a number of these in Britain in the era of escape from the Black
Plague to the 19th century, but two of the biggest involved transportation.  
  
One of these that I've identified was the fodder/horse/coal/lime cycle. More
and better fodder led to more and stronger horses, which hauled (among other
things) coal from the mines, initially little more than quarries, that had
started opening up in northeastern England by the 13th century. Coal, like
wood, was very costly to transport by land, but relatively cheap to ship by
sea or navigable river. As fodder improved, horses came to replace oxen in the
expensive step transporting goods, including coal, from mine, farm, or
workshop to port and from port to site of consumption. Many other regions
(e.g. in Belgium and China) had readily accessible coal, but none developed
this virtuous cycle so extensively and early.  
  
Among the early uses of coal was for heating, fuel for certain industrial
processes that required heat (e.g. in brewing beer), and, most interestingly,
for burning lime. Burned lime, slaked with water, could unlike the limestone
it came from be easily ground into a fine powder. This great increase in the
surface area of this chemical base, which let it de-acidify the soils on which
it was applied. The soils of Britain tend to be rather acidic, which allows
poisonous minerals, such as aluminum, to absorb into plants and blocks the
absorption of needed nutrients (especially NPK -- nitrogen, phosphorous, and
potassium). The application of lime thus increased the productivity of fields
for growing both food and fodder, completing the virtuous cycle. This cycle
operated most strongly during the period of the consistent progress in the
English Malthusian isocline from the 15th through 19th centuries.  
  
Another, related, but even more important cycle was the horse/transport and
institutions/markets/specialization cycle. More and better horses improved the
transport of goods generally, including agricultural goods. John Langdon [1]
estimates that a team of horses could transport a wagon of goods twice as fast
as a team of oxen, which suggests a factor of four increase in market area.
Add to this the Western European innovations in sailing during the 15th
century (especially the trading vessels and colliers that added lateen
sails(s) to the traditional square sails, allowing them to sail closer into
the wind), and market regions in much of Western Europe and especially Great
Britain were greatly expanded in the 15th and 16th centuries.  
  
Expanded markets in turn allowed a great elaboration of the division of labor.
Adam Smith famously described how division of labor and specialization greatly
improved the productivity of industry, but to some extent this also operated
in British agriculture. Eric Kerridge [2] eloquently described the
agricultural regions of Britain, each specializing in different crops and
breeds of livestock. Some were even named after their most famous
specializations: "Butter Country", "Cheese Country", "Cheshire Cheese
Country", "Saltings Country", etc. These undoubtedly emerged during the 15th
through 19th centuries, as prior to that time European agriculture had been
dominated by largely self-sufficient manors. And closing the cycle, there
emerged several localities that specialized in breeding a variety of horses.
Most spectacularly different British regions during this period bred no less
than three kinds of large draft horses: the Shire Horse, the Suffolk Punch (in
that eastern English county) and the Clydesdale (in that Scottish county).  
  
Institutions such as advertising and commercial law emerged or evolved to
allow lower transaction cost dealings between strangers. This was probably by
far the most non-obvious and difficult aspect of the problem of expanding
markets. Greatly aiding in this evolution was the growth of literacy due to
spread in Europe of the inexpensive books produced by printing especially in
the 16th and later centuries. Where in the Middle Ages literacy had been the
privilege of a religious elite, with very few on a manor literate beyond the
steward, after the 15th century an ever increasing population could read
advertisements, order goods remotely, read and even draft contracts.  
  
Another effect of longer-distance transportation was to open up more remote
lands, which had been too marginal to support self-sufficient agricultural, to
reclamation for use in specialized, trade-dependent agriculture. The ability
to lime soils that were otherwise too acidic also often contributed to
reclamation.  
  
There were many other improvements to English agriculture and transportation
during these crucial centuries, but the above cycles were probably the most
important up to the 19th century. Here I'll mention three important
transportation improvements later in this period that in many ways show the
culmination of the underlying trend: the development of the turnpike (private
toll) roads in the 18th century and the associated development of scheduled
transportation services, (2) a great expansion in the use of horse-drawn rail
cars in coal and other mines, and (3) the development of river navigations
largely in the 17th and 18th centuries, and canals largely in the 18th and
early 19th centuries, again almost entirely through private investment and
ownership.  
  
 _As coal mines were dug deeper, they were increasingly flooded with water.
Long before the steam engine, these mines were pumped by horse-powered gins.
Here horses on a gin power an axle (bent through a Hooke universal joint) and
belt, in this case powering an 18th century farmyard innovation, the threshing
machine. The horses know to not step on the rapidly spinning axle. I'm going
to guess that the horse gin was the inspiration for the merry-go-round:_  

  
  
  
  
 _Horse-drawn wagons on rails took coal from mines to docks on navigable
rivers and (no small matter) pulled the empty wagons back uphill. Coal and
other ores were hauled by horses over these wagonways over distances of a few
kilometers. They were almost exclusively used for mines, quarries, clay pits,
and the like, running from mine mouth to navigable water. Here's a horse
pulling coal on a wagonway:_  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 _More horses pulling coal on rails:_  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 _Now the only thing left of horse-drawn rail are tourist relics:_  

  
  
  
  
 _Even in 1903 the London streets were still powered by horses (see if you can
spot the two still-rare horseless carriages):_  

  
  
  
  
 _And now for a taste of the British river navigations and canals:_  

  
  
  
  
 _The Trent and Mersey canal, built in the late 18th century, could take you
from one side of England to the other:_  

  
  
  
  
 _Where Romans had used aqueducts to move water, the British used them in
their canal system to move goods where their canals needed to span valleys. A
large number of aqueducts were built from stone in Britain during its canal
boom in the 18th century. This was the original Barton Aqueduct on the
Bridgewater Canal (1760s):_  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 _In the late 18th century thesmelting of iron using coal instead of wood was
perfected. Soon thereafter iron became cheap enough to use for constructing
bridges and aqueducts. One result was the spectacular Pontcysyllte Aqueduct in
Wales. What in the early 19th century was a towpath for horses is now a
sidewalk for tourists. Careful, it's a long way down!_  

  
  
  
References  
  
Eric Kerridge, The Farmers of Old England  
  
John Langdon, Horses, Oxen, and Technological Innovation  

