Copyright (c) 1998 by Nick Szabo  
permission to redistribute without alteration hereby granted

### The Critique of Tradition

What are the proper methods for critiquing traditions related to interpersonal
behavior? The methods of the humanities include at their core methods for
examining the subjective source(s) and interpreters of a tradition. Here, most
arguments center around subjects, the authorities who are sources,
transmitters, and/or interpreters of a tradition. Arguments may also revolve
around the "subjects" referenced in the traditional texts: as heroic figures,
strategic players, and so on. An interesting book on game theory, _Negotiation
Games_, by Steven Brams, reinterprets several Torah/Old Testament stories as
games between the characters in the stories. God becomes just one of several
strategic players, albeit often with some tricks up His sleeve. Somehow I
think my old Sunday school teacher would not have approved, but these are
fascinating and potentially valuable interpretations.

Post-Hayek and algorithmic information theory, we recognize that information-
bearing codes can be computed (and in particular, ideas evolved from the
interaction of people with each other over many lifetimes), which are

    
    
    (a) not feasibly rederivable from first principles,
    (b) not feasibly and accurately refutable (given the existence of the code to be refuted)
    (c) not even feasibly and accurately justifiable (given the existence of the code to justify)
    

("Feasibility" is a measure of cost, especially the costs of computation and
empircal experiment. "Not feasibly" means "cost not within the order of
magnitude of being economically efficient": for example, not solvable within a
single human lifetime. Usually the constraints are empirical rather than
merely computational).

(a) and (b) are ubiqitous among highly evolved systems of interactions among
richly encoded entities (whether that information is genetic or memetic). (c)
is rarer, since many of these interpersonal games are likely no more diffult
than NP-complete: solutions cannot be feasibly derived from scratch, but known
solutions can be verified in feasible time. However, there are many problems,
especially empirical problems requiring a "medical trial" over one or more
full lifetimes, that don't even meet (c): it's infeasible to create a
scientifically repeatable experiment. For the same reason a scientific
experiment cannot refute _any_ tradition dealing with interpersonal problems
(b), because it may not have run over enough lifetimes, and we don't know
which computational or empirical class the interpersonal problem solved by the
tradition falls into. One can scientifically refute traditional claims of a
non-interpersonal nature, e.g. "God created the world in 4004 B.C.", but one
cannot accurately refute metaphorical interpretations or imperative statements
which apply to interpersonal relationships.

The genetic codes (especially their "semantics", the corresponding
metabolisms) of plants and animals are examples of such highly evolved
structures. We have only very recently achieved some understanding of the
syntax of such codes, and grok only a miniscule portion of their "semantics".

Memetic codes, such as legal traditions, are a still more complicated example
of such highly evolved structure: dealing with interactions between highly
information-rich minds over multiple lifetimes, during which certain actions
at the start of life can have irrevocable but not feasibly foreseeable
consequences on the rest of a life and on later generations, they typically
fall within (a), (b), and sometimes (c). Only a highly evolved tradition can
contain the information needed to solve such problems.

We must conclude that "social sciences", "rational ethics", "legal realism",
"law and economics", and other such shallowly rational approaches to
interpersonal problems can sometimes provide justifications in the sense of
(c), but it is a severe misapplication to use them to refute highly evolved
traditions. It is much more likley that contradictions between a highly
evolved tradition, and a rational analysis of interpersonal problems solved by
that tradition, are due to an incomplete axiomatization of the rational
theory, rather than due to flaws in the tradition.

### The Natures of Truth

How are hermeneutic, or intersubjective "truth" and objective truth different?
Does it makes sense to speak of the "truth" of tradition if we can't critique
it via objective means? In other words, if we can't rederive or at least check
such a "truth" with proximate rational or empirical methods? There are some
objective things we can conclude about subjects (because they are biologically
human, or computationally must be limited at least as much as Turing machines,
and so on). These tend to be either "meta" (such as computational limits), or
average tendencies of a varying population (such as purported evolved genetic
constraints on behavior), trivial from an interpersonal point of view (much
bioligical detail), or reflect transient phenomenon (almost all statistical
social measurements and models derived therefrom).

The most valuable "theories" about the intersubjective are those derived from
the multi-generational epidemioligical experiments that constitute cultural
evolution. These are usually not rationally explicable.

As Dawkins has observed, death is vastly more probable than life. Cultural
parts randomly thrown together, or thrown together by some computationally
shallow line of reasoning, most likely result in a big mess rather than well
functioning relationships between people. The cultural beliefs which give rise
to civilization are, like the genes which specify an organism, a highly
improbable structure, surrounded in "meme space" primarily by structures which
are far more dysfunctional. Most small deviations, and practically all
"radical" deviations, result in the equivalent of death for the organism: a
mass breakdown of civilization which can include genocide, mass poverty,
starvation, plagues, and, perhaps most commonly and importantly, highly
unsatisying, painful, or self-destructive individual life choices.

Although attempts are often made to justify or falsify intersubjective truths
rationally, this hardly demonstrates either (a) the global utility of the
rational plan versus current practice, or (b) that the rationalists would have
reached the same conclusions had they not already been given by tradition the
answers to be derived. Hayek called faith in proximately rational social
design a "fatal conceit". The stuff proximate rationalists come up with that
is not already in the law is eventually shown to be garbage, although many
lives may be ruined before this is discovered. As human culture becomes more
homogenous, these intersubjective mutations become increasingly and more
comprehensively lethal. Most human effort is now spent repairing the damage
caused by these pathological cultural novelties.

Thus, a discovery in social science which contradicts a highly evolved belief
is most likely hermeneutically false: ultimately destructive to the
individuals or groups who believe it in preference to the highly evolved
beliefs. Many radicals even brag about this, about how "dangerous" their ideas
are. Tens of millions of victims of torture and genocide of radical,
"scientific" ideologies in the twentieth century can testify to this. It is
more complete to say that radical plans to change culture are dangerously
shallow.

Intersubjective truths can be classified into at least two major groups,
transient (proximate, between contemporaries) and traditional (ultimate, or
multi-generational). Hayek's canonical example of a transient intersubjective
truth is a market price. Most economists think of price in terms of _value_
rather than "truth". But prices incorporate both objective information unknown
to other subjects _and_ the values of those subjects. In intersubjective
communications, value and truth are inseparably intertwined.

I argue that we should think of highly evolved tradition, what Gadamer calls
"hermeneutical truths", in the same way. In one sense, they constitute a kind
of "truth", since they can incorporate predictive models of the
intersubjective world that are, in principle, achievable from rational
thought, but in practice the rational computations and empirical observations
would take longer than humans have available. In this sense it is accurate to
call highly evolved tradition "truth". But this truth inherently includes the
value choices of the various people who have passed on and thus added to a
tradition. Many things that are true about the intersubjective world may be
lost because they are not valuable. Many trivially untrue things (such as
superstitions and myths) may be included because they motivate valuable
behavior that reflects deeper but less accessible truths. (Note that "depth"
and "accessibility" are the same computational measure, the former across
generations and the latter proximate). So it is even invalid to argue _ad
absurdum_ (by contradition), to try to falsify subjective traditions by
objective standards. Here again, value and truth are inseparably intertwined.
Only with purely objective phenomena can value be completely divorced from
scientific truth.

Due both to the truth/value intertwining and evolutionary contingency,
traditional forms cannot usually be easily reverse engineered. However, due to
the depth of multi-generational traditions, we may expect reverse engineering
to be somewhat easier than invention or replacement from scratch, if we can
come up with the proper methodologies for deconstructing tradition: to tease
out truth from value, to determine cultural niches in which traditions
flourish and fade, are more valuable or less, are more true or less (three
different but related measures), and so on.

### An Intersubjective Analysis of God

Let's take, as an exercise in intersubjective critique, a core question from
religion: does God exist? The objective and intersubjective answers may be
different without inconsistency. Furthermore, lacking any other reasonable
word, "exists" and "truth" may be as properly used in one mode as in the
other. Indeed, we may often used the words "exist" and "truth" in completely
intersubjective contexts, without realizing that we are in a different mode. A
proper critique must distinguish between the two modes.

Gods are objectively imaginary, but serve as a very useful metaphor for the
theory of the intersubjective I have outlined. In other words, God exists --
and belief in Him constitutes a true belief -- intersubjectively, but not
objectively. "Omniscience" stands in for the depth of multi-generational
experience which cannot be replicated via proximate reasoning; "divine
inspiration" is a simple explanation in lieu of understanding the processes of
cultural evolution -- most people still don't even understand the relatively
simple process of genetic evolution -- and so on. To grossly oversimplify, God
is one hell of a computational shorcut. Belief in God propagated because it
reflected inaccessible truths about the cultural evolution which actually
produced the accompanying ethical systems.

This theory is very simplified and tentative; there are obviously many other
aspects of God, and many other religious concepts besides God, which pertain
both to cultural evolution itself, and to the truths and values brought to us
via that evolution. This is perhaps just a start on an enlightened,
scientifically acceptable theology. If objective belief is necessary for the
motivational impact of objectively false religious stories, then "God is
dead", as Nietchze declared, and in terms of interpersonal relationships we
are forced to grope around blindly, unable to either properly accept the given
solutions or solve the problems ourselves.

The temptation, often taken, to argue _ad absurdum_ from the objective to the
intersubjective makes the continuing motivational effect of a myth problematic
in the face of contradictory objective evidence. Also problematic is the
equally invalid tendency to argue the other way, against objective findings
based on faith in the subjective tradition, as with Creationists. But however
invalid, the seeming contradictions between these two different kinds of
"truth" have driven many away from highly evolved religious ethics on the one
hand, or the findings of modern science on the other.

The theory that religions are evolved rather than divinely inspired (or,
rather, that divine inspiration is the intersubjective expression of the
objective fact of religious evolution), poses an even more ubiquitous attack
to those who argue _ad absurdum_ from the intersubjective to the objective or
vice versa. If the human mind is incapable of making this distinction, with at
least the fluidity that we reason _ad absurdum_, then our evolved
intersubjective truths and values are degraded by the discoveries of objective
science (example: atheist Communism), and the attempts to defend valuable
intersubjective truths degrade our understanding of objective truths (example:
Creationism).

### An Evolutionary Interpretation of Theological Justification

A good rule of thumb for rational interpretation of theological justification:
map the objective fact of cultural evolution to the intersubjective truth of
God.

In other words, treat God or the gods as a metaphor for our modern insights
into cultural evolution. Indeed, humans did not "create" most of human
tradition in the sense of a watchmaker designing a watch. The divine is a
brilliant metaphor for the lack of ability of a single mind to rationally
understand the functions of traditions.

God as a metaphor for cultural evolution accounts for some of the theological
divine traits. Relative to individuals, highly evolved traditions can be
practically omniscient (containing much deeper information than the individual
could possibly conclude from his immediate experience and reasoning),
omnipresent (present throughout a culture), and omnipotent (capable of actions
possible only with highly coordinated groups of people).

Lacking local rational justification for particular traditions, we need to
develop the kind of awe and respect for highly evolved structures that was
once held for God. This involves reconciling a tolerant intersubjective faith
in God with the critical study of the objective world. Hermeneutics, the
humanistic methodologies for interpreting and applying tradition, should fuse
its objective evolutionary understanding of culture with its theological
roots, and revive the theological justification for many of our highly evolved
interpersonal traditions.

### Caveat

In some cases and for some aspects of tradition, a radical shift of
technology, such as moving the institutions of law and governance from paper
to computational/networked multimedia, or the medical technologies of life
extension, demand radical (in other words, shallow) adaptation of
interpersonal traditions. This despite our profound inability to predict
consequences or find the long-term good solutions over the span of a mere few
decades, within which technologies can so substantially change the nature of
our relationships. Choose your poison.

### Coda: _Ad Hominem_ and Argument From Authority

When is it reasonable to use _ad hominem_ and argument from authority in
various situations? For example,

    
    
    -- in a physical science paper,
    -- in a social science paper,
    -- in polite conversation,
    -- in a political debate.
    

From an immediately rational point of view, these are always invalid methods
of debate. However, we are computationally limited creatures, often not
capable of anything even approaching full rationality, and so these thinking
processes in practice have their place. Even if we were in principle
unlimited, but computational resources were not costless, it would sometimes
pay to take the computational shortcut of relying on others ' judgements. On
the other hand, this can be problematic for a variety of reasons, for example
when the other parties have strategic reasons for distorting their message.

Examples of the practical use of these decision processes include reputation
(of people, brands, etc.) and credentials. In the physical sciences,
experiments are usually possible and repeatable, or there are other objective
means (such as parsimony) for determining the truth of a statement. However,
even when communicating purely objective information, subjective
interpretation, selection, etc. quickly creep in, and those not directly
observing the experiment must rely in large degree on the authority of the
experimenters or theorists. Interestingly, good judgement of authority is
based largely on a "meta" understanding, not of the particular science, but of
the scientific method itself: is the theory falsifiable and parsimonious, are
the experiments repeatable, are the statistical methods valid, and so on. Much
scientific misinterpretation, and much of decisionmakers' lack of scientific
understanding, may be remediable by improving understanding of scientific
methods themselves, rather than improving understanding of the results of
particular sciences.

### References

Szabo,  Hermeneutics: An Introduction to the Interpretation of Tradition  
Bartley, W.W. _The Retreat to Commitment_  
Gadamer, Hans-Georg _Truth and Method_  
Hayek, Freidrich  _Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism_  

