This would imply that subscribers see the source of each rating.
You would have to know that in order to judge whether to believe one or
not.  But I think this might consume too much bandwidth.  With possibly
many raters, each producing a potentially multi-dimensional rating per
message, this would be a lot of stuff to send along with each message.

My suggestion would be to just present the union of all the subject
tags produced by the raters.  This is a moderate amount of information,
and to the extent that raters agree on subject tags it could in many
cases be a very succinct presentation.  We don't want to make this too
unwieldy.


This makes sense, but there must still be two lists: one, the "raw" list,
which is seen (at least) by raters and contains messages which have not
yet been rated; and the other, the "rated" list, which has the rated
messages.  My suggestion was that messages which did not receive any
ratings by anyone would not make it into the rated list.  Obviously an
alternative would be to send it out tagged to show that no one cared
enough to rate it.


This could also be used for negative ratings: subject tags such as
"flame", "faq", "rant", etc. could be used to give more information than
just the topic of the message.  People could set up their own systems to
filter the message to exclude messages with certain of these tags.


Message-ID is probably OK, but it is kind of long.  Many mail agents will
insert an "In-Reply-To" into the header which identifies the message ID,
but not all will.  It would be a real pain to type one in manually.
Another advantage of numbering messages sent on the "raw" list would be
that people would be able to tell when they have missed messages (but that
is irrelevant to the ratings issue, I admit).