Scott Brickner <sjb@universe.digex.net> writes:



This is true, but it doesn't mean that the threat can be neglected.  A
successful MITM attack may be a matter of reading even one message and
acting on it, if the participants don't find out until later that they
were robbed.  In fact, they might not ever notice that they key they
used Tuesday was different from the key they used Thursday, if they
didn't cache the keys.  (Yes, PGP does store the keys in a local key ring
cache but not all systems will necessarily work that way.)



Obviously the MITM cannot handle (most) communications taking place
offline.  But there may be a lot of people who don't use any of these
offline methods to validate their keys.  These people don't go to
academic conferences, don't read their key id's over the phone, and
don't print them on business cards (or if they do, they don't get
business cards from those they communicate with securely).  Maybe this
will change, maybe it is a matter of user education, but it is still an
extra effort which will be important to have secure communications.  I
don't think this is widely recognized (other than in the context of the
need for certificates and signed keys).


Note too that Mitch is not necessarily taking any risks here even if he
is caught.  "Mitch" could be a remotely operating program, a virus
embedded in Alice's computer or in some link between her system and the
outside world, which is performing these transformations and sending the
decrypted messages out anonymously.  So even if Alice discovers the
trickery there may be no effective way to track down the miscreant.




or

3. Mitch's MITM attack is transitory and he doesn't care if he is caught
afterwards, he got his goodies.

or

4. Alice doesn't go to a lot of trouble to check her keys via offline
means.  After all, MITM is so rare it can't happen to her.

Practice safe cryptography!