Bob Smart <smart@mel.dit.csiro.au> writes:


This would be, say, a DNS lookup on www.egghead.com.


I get it by connecting to that IP address and asking for it, or perhaps
I have it cached or I get it from some public cache.


I see the certificate is signed by someone I trust and it certifies that
this key is good for connections to Egghead Software at www.egghead.com.



OK, maybe this is some DNS variant that given www.egghead.com, returns a
public key 0x12345678.


OK, so now I do another DNS lookup on www.egghead.com to get the IP
address.  Or maybe I even use key 0x12345678 as an alternative index to
get that address.


Now you've lost me.  Are you saying that the key is self-certifying,
saying "I belong to 192.9.8.7"?  That is, it is accompanied by a
signature issued by that key itself on this IP address?  I hate to be
difficult, but this does not provide me with a warm feeling.  Anyone
could have issued that key, claiming to belong to that IP address.  If
the person who did so is able to interpose himself between me and that
address then my messages are not secure.


Again, I don't follow how we gain this certainty.


This can be dealt with in the certificate context by having a
certificated key sign a statement that the IP address is now
such-and-such.


I don't really care whether the name is called an attribute, a
distinguished name, or an ooblek.  I just don't see how you're going to
get along without it.  The fact is, we live in a world populated by
people and companies and we use names to identify them.  I will grant
that there are problems with uniqueness but I don't think the solution
can be to just give up on the whole idea of names since they are so
messy.  Pretending that keys are communicating beings is not going to
work.