To add some background, here are two recent complaints which I received.
They give some of the flavor of what people object to:




These messages show that most people are unfamiliar with the notion of
anonymous remailers.  Their first exposure to the idea is when they get
some objectionable anonymous mail.  So to the extent that the problem is
to be solved by education, we would have a very long row to hoe.

Fortunately, the vast majority of such complaints can be dealt with by
blocking the addresses of the people complaining from receiving future
anonymous mail.  This almost always satisfies people.

The idea of making people ask to receive anonymous mail is interesting.
It would not seem to apply to newsgroups and/or mailing lists, but for
individuals it might work.  The remailer would have to be able to
distinguish between "end users" and other remailers in order to know
whether it was just one step in a chain or the last step.  (We can't
depend on the sender to tell us that since it is abusive or harrassing
mail which will cause the problems, and senders of such mail would
presumably have incentive to get it delivered.)

It would require somewhat greater resources on the part of the remailer
to hold the messages.  I would guess from experience that a large
fraction of the messages would never be picked up, although my
perceptions may be biased since I only see bounced, poorly formatted, or
complained-about mail, and these categories probably have a larger
fraction of messages from clueless and obnoxious people.  But certainly
the messed-up messages I do see are mostly flames, "guess who's", and
similar worthless junk.  I hope there are some pearls going through that
I never see, but that is just a matter of faith.