The safe-tcl mailing list has not been active for a few months.  I think
a lot of interest has transferred to Java.  One problem is that safe-tcl
was oriented around email, so it lacks facilities for accessing web
pages.

I agree with Ray that the security of safe-tcl leaves something to be
desired.  I implemented a safe-tcl mail filter which would automatically
run incoming mail scripts which were in safe-tcl format.  This would be a
generalization of a remailer, so that users could write scripts which
would determine when the remailing would occur, etc.  However I ran into
a number of problems, particularly related to persistent storage (e.g.
disk file access).  This is a hard problem for a "safe" system to solve.

One solution is to just forbid it, but beyond that you need to have rules
about how much disk space a script can use, whether they can access each
other's space, etc.  There are some nice applications if they can do so,
for example the telescript model where two software agents come together
and exchange some information.

Another tricky issue is if you are going to let the script talk to the
outside world via email or tcp connections.  How do you prevent abuse of
this feature (sending junk email, or connecting to a web page and
entering bogus data into a form)?  But again, without this capability the
script is pretty much limited to drawing pretty pictures on your screen,
which isn't very useful.

Here is one message I sent to the safe-tcl list earlier this year
describing some of these problems in a little more detail.  Note that
there were also several bugs in the implementation which left security
holes, things being checked in the wrong context and such.  This is
similar to what Ray was citing.