mccoy@communities.com (Jim McCoy) writes:

I think part of the confusion here is the name "BlackNet".  As I envision
the concept, BlackNet is not really an anonymous contact service, or in
fact a network of any sort.  Rather, it is a vendor.  It buys and sells
information.  The name, while provocative, is a bit misleading in this
regard.  (This is just my model, and may not actually correspond with
Tim's or anyone else's idea.  But I think it more closely matches the
data haven concept, and in fact is more consistent with the original
announcement.)

BlackNet has a public key, and a known virtual location in the form of
certain newsgroups that it monitors.  Anyone can initiate a
communication interchange with BlackNet by posting a message to those
groups, encrypted with BlackNet's key.  Presumably in that message will
be included return address information in the form of a key and a set of
locations that will be monitored for replies.  In this way ongoing
conversations can be maintained between BlackNet and customers who are
either buying or selling to it.

BlackNet would not be used (as I see it) for direct communication
between buyers and sellers of information.  How would the BlackNet
public key fit into this model?  The existence of a specific BlackNet
public key is part of what drives me to picture it as a vendor.
Rather, BlackNet will buy information (plus unrestricted rights to
disseminate that information), add it to its catalog, and then
advertise its availability and price.


This model pictures BlackNet differently than I do.  As I see it, once
you sell your data to BlackNet you don't have to take any more steps.
There may still be problems, in that you may feel that BlackNet is
setting too high a price on the data you want to distribute.  However of
course anyone is free to start up a competing service, if they want to
take the risks.  BlackNet fees will in the long run be determined by
competitive market conditions based on the costs of maintaining
anonymity.


This is a little different from my picture of BlackNet, as I wrote above.
I would see BlackNet as being a particular seller of information, who
will respond to this message.  It could have competitors like SafeHaven,
StrongHold, InfoBase, etc., each of which will offer data for a price,
and each of which will have its own reputation for reliability.


Here is where BlackNet as an information middleman makes the most sense.
Its business model includes the costs of this sort of vigilance, which
after all can be automated.



Actually we now have "virtual malls" online.  These are in their infancy
but eventually they could become as easy to use and reliable as regular
malls (for appropriate kinds of goods).  All that BlackNet (as I picture
it) lacks is a WWW interface, and even that could be provided if the
gateway server could be made immune to legal pressure and if various
technicalities about anonymous WWW connections could be dealt with.

As for reputations, if BlackNet is one of several vendors of
information, like its competitors, they can all develop reputations of
their own for reliability, honesty, availability, etc.  There may be
problems if the testimonials of customers are all anonymous, but in
some cases such methods as signed transcripts of information exchanges
can be used by one side or the other to justify claims that the other
side has cheated.