

  
A few more questions about
http://privwiki.dreamhosters.com/wiki/Bitcoin_DNS_System_Proposal  
  
It appears this can support several top level domains, such as .anon, .sex,
.p2p, or whatever. Other proposals envisioned a single new TLD like .bitdns.  
  
Names can be changed when registered, but only from one TLD to another. You
could change pics.sex to pics.p2p. I don't understand the motivation for this.
It seems like something that would seldom be useful.  
  
I'm still confused about fees. I was assuming that fees would be paid to the
DNS servers, for the service of acting as a gateway from the Bitcoin block
chain to the DNS system. I now see another interpretation, where DNS servers
don't receive the fees, but they nevertheless demand that transaction fees of
a certain minimum level be paid to miners. As long as they see that the domain
name was registered with a large enough transaction fee to the miner, they
will pass it through to the DNS. Is it possible that this is what was
intended?  
  
The proposal seems to envision a relatively small set of DNS servers that
would be authorities for these new domain names and be the ones who bring the
names from the block chain into DNS. These would be somewhat analogous to
registrars today. (I may be misunderstanding this!) Each of these DNS servers
publishes a schedule of fees for performing this service. To register a new
name... hmm, I am guessing now. Would you contract with one particular DNS
server to do something else than host your regular DNS records?  
  
I had thought it would be ok to expect DNS servers to follow the block chain
and honor valid domain name transactions without requiring certain minimum
fees. Domain names are so valuable (at least at first) that miners already
have ample motivation to demand substantial (like $100 = 500 Bitcoins per
transaction) fees. Eventually, if the system is successful, virtually all DNS
servers would read the block chain.

