

Quote from: BubbleBoy on September 23, 2011, 11:06:22 PM

The advantage of not having fees does not materialize for the client, so he's
unlikely to care that the shop is saving money. The customer drives the demand
for a payment method - the shops are forced to follow or loose market share.
The shops would get rid of credit cards in a hart beat if they could get the
customers to pay with cash.  
  
So aside of the phony geek appeal, what does this system offer to the customer
? Credit cards offer interest free loans for up to 2 months, emergency funding
past that period, and money back guarantee. Bitcoin offers final indisputable
transactions - why do you think customers will prefer it ? Don't even get me
started on the clunky desktop client that kills your harddrive.  

  
I can tell you exactly why customers AND merchants will prefer it for online
payments.  
  
I've spent the last 10 days trying to order two Android tablets from Alibaba
express with my credit card that has a California billing address.  
I'm trying to have one tablet shipped to myself in Tokyo, and another to a
developer in New York.  
Alibaba seems to think that my order is CC fraud in action. I've submitted
copies of my Passport, my local government ID, photos of the Credit card
itself, photocopies of the Credit card statement that was sent through the
mail, and more. All of these have been submitted multiple times, yet they
still keep canceling my order due to fraud concerns! I've wasted several hours
of my life trying to convince them that I am not a scammer with a stolen
credit card.  
If I had been allowed to pay with Bitcoins, none of these problems would have
existed. I would already have my tablets, and Alibaba and myself would have
saved hours of time! Instead, I am still waiting to see if they will accept
the last batch of documents I submitted.  

