

Quote from: Chaang Noi (Goat) ช้างน้อย on July 28, 2013, 03:56:35 AM

Thing is, how innocent is he?  

Blame the victim much?  
  

Quote from: Chaang Noi (Goat) ช้างน้อย on July 28, 2013, 03:56:35 AM

Why was he in a Mt. Gox video?

I wasn't. The video was posted to my own youtube channel because I thought the
world might like an update on what is going on over there.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UP1YsMlrfF0  
  

Quote from: Chaang Noi (Goat) ช้างน้อย on July 28, 2013, 03:56:35 AM

Why did he say he would help us out and then never do anything?  

I've actually done a lot, but have been asked to keep it confidential at the
moment.  
  

Quote from: Chaang Noi (Goat) ช้างน้อย on July 28, 2013, 03:56:35 AM

He is also part of the coinlab team that has a partnership with Gox.  

I'm not an active part of the coinlab team in anyway. I provided part of the
seed money to get them started. Now I hear from Peter once or twice a month
when he sends out investor update emails.  
  

Quote from: Chaang Noi (Goat) ช้างน้อย on July 28, 2013, 03:56:35 AM

I'm starting to despise Ver here more than anyone else because he said he
would help the rest of us and then never got back to us, but has very clearly
been involved with Gox.

Way to blame the victim.  
  
  

Quote from: Chaang Noi (Goat) ช้างน้อย on July 28, 2013, 03:56:35 AM

I don't know if there is a secret deal or what but he should really explain
himself as he looks pretty guilty here.  

There is no secret deal. I'm still owed 24,841 BTC and haven't gotten a single
one back.  
  

Quote from: Chaang Noi (Goat) ช้างน้อย on July 28, 2013, 03:56:35 AM

Ver, Do you want to up date us on all of this? We have been waiting 6 months
now.  

Unfortunately I don't have as much time as I would like to surf the forums
providing updates. Anyone is welcome to contact me any time by email. My PGP
keys are listed on rogerver.com  
  
Placing blame at this point doesn't do much good, but in my opinion, in order
of responsibility, the blame belongs with:  
  
1\. The Bitcoinica Hacker  
The hacker is obviously smart enough to earn money honestly and has no excuse
for what he has done.  
  
2\. Amir Taaki  
He released the Bitcoinica source code while an offer was on the table to buy
Bitcoinica for enough money to pay back everyone %100 of what they were owed,
except myself, Jesse Powell, Jed McCaleb, Brian Cartmell. Amir's publishing of
the source code destroyed any value Bitcoinica had left, and directly led to
an additional $40,000 USD and 40,000 BTC to be stolen from Bitcoinica's mtgox
accounts.  
  
3\. Patrick Strateman  
Patrick has refused to cooperate in any way with the liquidators or anyone
else involved. He has blocked myself, Jesse, and Jed on skype, and does not
reply to any of our emails. Recently Patrick's mother contacted me, and I met
with her in person about the situation since Patrick isn't willing to.

