

Mike Hearn:

Quote

If I don't have to choose who I trust then how do I know what I see on the
screen reflects the same reality other people see? In particular, if I want to
become a merchant, how do I stop somebody from connecting to my node and
feeding it fictional transactions that show me being a millionaire?

  
If you want to become a merchant yes you should enter in some nodes that you
trust. If you are just a random person checking out the software then there is
some bootstrapping process (like there is for bitcoin) that gets you connected
to the network. At that point everyone you connect to will tell you the hash
of the current ledger. If you notice a discrepancy then yes you will have to
jump through some hoops. Come to the forum and ask for a list of trusted nodes
or something. But again this level of trust is very low. You could pick 100
random forum users and be fine.  
  

Quote

Currently I don't really have to trust any miners. According to the
bitcoinwatch site, no pool has even 40% right now, and in the long run I
expect mega-pools to be even less common.

You don't have to trust a particular miner but you do have to trust that
artforz and deepbit aren't conspiring. Which is analogous to having to trust
that more than 50 of the random forum users you picked to trust aren't working
together.  
  
kjj:

Quote

You would need not just 50% of the world's hashing power, but closer to 95%+
of it if you wanted to pull off any meaningful BTC scam.

I don't think so. You can steal the vast majority of blocks from then on by
storing up blocks you generate and release them only when someone else also
solves one. Not sure if you consider that meaningful or not. (There was some
long ago thread about this that I can't find now) You could double spend by
getting one block ahead of the good network and then just stay ahead until you
are ready to drop your one block longer chain.

