So I've been thinking...  
bitcoin mining seems like such an unfortunate side effect of the system since
it is so wasteful. It will be a bit obscene how much will be spent mining if
the network ever gets large. It would be cool to come up with a bitcoin that
doesn't need miners.  
  
There are several issues but Ill ignore how coins are distributed and focus
on the central problem of creating some way to trust the central ledger*.  
Currently this is what mining solves. The network trusts the ledger with the
most mining done on it. So now to trust bitcoin you have to trust that >50% of
the current mining power is "good". And actually the way the network has
evolved with pools we are actually trusting that every large pool operator is
good since even if the pool isnt over 50% the operator could have non-pool
mining going on bringing the total over 50% or two pools could collude to
defraud the network etc. Also if say some government decides to wreck the
network it wouldnt be that expensive for them to do so. (This is all
discussed in other threads so no need to go into this here) My point is that
although the current network uses mining as a way to solve the trust issue it
really doesnt since you still must trust the large pool operators.  
  
My idea is to make this issue of trust explicit.  
  
Lets say a **node** has a public key that the client generates for them.
There is no connection between this key and a wallet key. It just allows you
to be sure you are talking to the node you think you are.  
  
So when you run a node you choose which other nodes you trust. So you could
say I trust my 3 friends nodes, Gavins node, and these 5 businesses
nodes. This trust just means that you believe these people will never
participate in a double spend attack or otherwise manipulate the ledger.  
The ledger would basically be like the current bitcoin block chain but it
would also have a list of what nodes believe the current ledger to be valid.
<hash of current ledger signed by nodes public key> (This list doesnt have
to be complete. Nodes can just collect this list as needed. They could even
just ask the nodes they trust if they think the current ledger is valid since
those are the only ones they care about)  
  
Transactions are still sent to all nodes connected to the network. There would
be a network wide timestamp. Transactions would only be accepted if they were
within a certain time period of the network timestamp. So you would need to
wait maybe 10min before you could fully trust a given transaction. After this
waiting period you could be sure those coins werent double spent.  
  
If a node ever encounters two conflicting ledgers it would just go with the
one that was validated by more nodes that it trusts.  
  
So there should always be a consensus among the trusted members of the
network.  
  
There would be a way to look up particular nodes in the network and ask them
questions. (Im imagining this whole thing running on Kademlia, a DHT)  
  
So obviously this is still vague because I haven't had time to work out all
the details. Im hoping someone else will be inspired.  
  
ok rip into it!  
  
*(I guess you could try to come up a way to get rid of the central ledger but I have a feeling that might not be possible)

